there is not a single member of this house who has not supported some form of general election , a special election , to replace the members at some point . 
the chair of the constitution subcommittee says this is what happens : martial law . 
we do not know who would fill the vacancy of the presidency , but we do know that the succession act most likely suggests it would be an unelected person . 
the sponsors of the bill before us today insist , and i think rightfully so , on the importance of elections . 
but to then say that during a 45-day period we would have none of the checks and balances so fundamental to our constitution , none of the separation of powers , and that the presidency would be filled by an unelected member of the cabinet who not a single member of this country , not a single citizen , voted to fill that position , and that that person would have no checks and balances from congress for a period of 45 days i find extraordinary . 
do they at that point elect a speaker of the house in the absence of other members ? 
it responds with the fantasy , first of all , that a lot of people will still survive ; but we have no guarantee of that . 
many of our states are going increasingly to mail-in ballots . 
i would ask my dear friends , will you conduct this election in 45 days if there is anthrax in the mail and still preserve the franchise of the american people ? 
i find it extraordinary , frankly , that while saying you do not want to amend the constitution , we began this very congress by amending the constitution through the rule , by undermining the principle that a quorum is 50 percent of the body and instead saying it is however many people survive . 
again , not an elected person , as you say is so critical and i believe is critical , but a temporary appointee , frankly , who not a single other member of this body knows who they are . 
so we not only have an unelected person , we have an unknown person who will convene this body , and who , by the way , could conceivably convene it for their own election to then become the president of the united states under the succession act . 
here is the fundamental question for us , my friends , and it is this : the american people are watching television and an announcement comes on and says the congress has been destroyed in a nuclear attack , the president and vice president are killed and the supreme court is dead and thousands of our citizens in this town are . 
under your bill , 45 days of chaos . 
apparently , according to the committee on the judiciary subcommittee on the constitution chairman , 45 days of marshal law , rule of this country by an unelected president with no checks and balances . 
or an alternative , an alternative which says quite simply that the people have entrusted the representatives they send here to make profound decisions , war , taxation , a host of other things , and those representatives would have the power under the bill of the gentleman from california ( mr. rohrabacher ) xz4003430 bill or mine to designate temporary successors , temporary , only until we can have a real election . 
the distinguished chairman of the committee on the judiciary made some comments recently that suggested that somehow terrorists would oppose this bill and by some implication would favor the bill the gentleman from california ( mr. rohrabacher ) xz4003430 and i have put forward because it seems to support their autocratic views of government . 
in fact , what our bill would do is tell the terrorists , you could come on a single day and set off a nuclear weapon in this town and kill every single member of us ; and though we would be missed , the very next day the congress would be up and functioning with every single state , every single district having full representation by statesmen and stateswomen at a time of national crisis . 
we are trying to tell the terrorists , you can kill all of us as individuals , but you will not defeat this institution . 
you will not defeat the principle of representation . 
you will not defeat the principles of checks and balances . 
if the terrorists were to strike your conference retreat where the president speaks to the republican house and senate members and kill hundreds of house and senate members on the republican side , the democrats at that point claim the majority . 
the democrats at that point elect a speaker of the house . 
you are leaving your own party , you are leaving the will of the people through their elections vulnerable . 
if we have temporary replacements , you immediately reconstitute the house ; you immediately ensure representation ; you assure that you maintain the balance of political power ; and you do it in an orderly , structured way with no chaos , in a way that is constitutionally valid by definition . 
it leaves the terrorists able to change our system of government . 
you are going to try to say that at the start of this year we have solved this problem ; let us go home . 
the other day a gentleman testified before the committee on the budget and said this : `` the lack of preparation for continuity , for true continuity invites attack. '' you are inviting attack . 
it does not solve the problem for this reason : by leaving us without a congress for 45 days , we essentially impose the opportunity for the executive branch to exert marshal law , and that is not what the framers of this country had in mind . 
furthermore , it has a host of problems . 
they will come to this body , choose one of its members as speaker . 
you are essentially leaving this country without a house of representatives , without checks and balances , without separation of powers , for at least 45 days , assuming an election can be held in 45 days and assuming that the terrorists through an anthrax attack , like they subjected this very capitol to , will not somehow undermine that ability . 
mr. chairman , reclaiming my time , let me make two final points : one , the majority party must understand this : if you are at a republican conference retreat and terrorists should strike you and kill the president and vice president and significant numbers of your side of the aisle , the democrats under your proposed law will obtain the majority , will elect a speaker of the house , and that person will then become the president of the united states of america . 
whether it is the proposal of the gentleman from california ( mr. rohrabacher ) xz4003430 and mine or others , we should commit to having this full house seriously consider this . 
vote no on this bill and insist on true debate on true continuity of congress in a responsible way that protects the balance of power , assures real succession to the presidency , and , most importantly , assures that your constituents will have representation at a time when our nation may well go to nuclear war , institute a draft , appropriate trillions of dollars , suspend habeas corpus and impose marshal law . 
he said : `` the accumulation of all powers , legislative , executive , and judiciary in the same hands , whether of one , a few , or many , and whether hereditary , self-appointed , or elected , may justly be pronounced the very definition of tyranny. '' now , i would like , if i may , to ask my colleagues , before we pass this appropriations bill with legislative language in it alleging to maintain continuity , to maybe address a couple of questions , before my colleagues vote on this , and i will yield time . 
mr. chairman , reclaiming my time , the fact is this congress took a number of very important actions , as the distinguished gentleman from illinois knows , during that same time period . 
let me ask this : if what the gentleman is saying is that we are not going to do anything , the executive branch has all the control , then how do we not just define madison 's very definition of tyranny ? 
mr. chairman , i do not have it on the top of my head , my friend ; but i can say that it is much faster than 7 weeks . 
if that is what you are voting for , then let us be honest with the american public , as apparently the chairman of the committee on the judiciary has been . 
how many millions of americans are you willing to leave without representation as article i , section 8 responsibility such as declarations of war , appropriations of funds , et cetera , are made ? 
how many millions of americans is the gentleman willing to leave without representation ? 
i want to revisit this issue , and i want to clarify a couple of things . 
the opponents of a real continuity solution have asserted that the gentleman from california ( mr. rohrabacher ) xz4003430 and i would take away the right to election . 
i have heard the chairman of the committee on the judiciary point out that in the days post-9/11 it was an elected congress , not an appointed congress , that made decisions . 
let me raise a couple of other points . 
article i , section 8 , of the constitution , as we all know , details a host of functions of this congress . 
people on the other side of this argument have said , oh , if we have anything but a direct election , the terrorists have won . 
far preferable would be some mechanism in which the terrorists and the rest of the world could see the congress of the united states reconvening with legitimacy and with distinguished statesmen from both sides of the aisle to conduct the people 's business until such time as we had really elections . 
at the start of this congress , the first order of business was to pass the house rules . 
the second order of business was to pass a rule that was unconstitutional . 
the first order of business was to swear an oath to uphold the constitution . 
the first order of business of the first congress of the united states was to adjourn for lack of a quorum . 
and yet this body says , well , gee , you know , it takes too long to amend the constitution , so let us do things unconstitutionally at a time of national crisis . 
in this congress we have spent so much time debating so many things of much less importance , and it is fair enough to say that my amendment did not pass . 
i have to tell you , when i talk to my colleagues and i ask them these questions , how many constituents are you willing to leave , how many millions of americans with no representation at all , no representation , during a time of national crisis ; how willing are you to have a cabinet member serve as president , with no checks and balances , secretary of agriculture , health and human services . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of the time . 
i believe the best way to have a republic is to have representation from all of the constituents . 
but let me point out to the gentleman from california ( mr. dreier ) xz4001150 as he well knows , the bipartisan 9/11 commission , which included newt gingrich , tom foley , alan simpson , lloyd cutler , a host of other scholars , has rejected essentially the proposal by the distinguished gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. sensenbrenner ) xz4003650 , and has concluded with great reluctance that we do indeed need a mechanism to amend the constitution so that whatever mechanism is arrived at is constitutionally valid . 
i would weigh the weight of their testimony and their objectivity and their bipartisanship against one single individual that you continually quote . 
major votes in the u.s. house of representatives , september 11-october 26 , 2001 september 13 , 2001 . 
h.r. 2884 , victims of terrorism relief act of 2001 . 
the bill exempted individuals killed in the 9/11 terrorist attacks , or who die as a result of injuries suffered in those attacks , from paying federal income tax in the year of their death . 
this bill directed the justice department to expedite the benefit payment process for the public safety officers ( and their families ) that were killed or suffered catastrophic injuries sustained in the line of duty in connection with the terrorist attacks of sept . 
the bill appropriated $ 40 billion in emergency funds to pay for the costs of recovery from the 9/11 terrorist attacks and to counter , investigate and prosecute terrorist activities . 
h. j. res. 64 , authorization of force . 
this bill provided $ 15 billion in assistance to the u.s. airline industry to help stabilize the financial condition of the industry in the wake of the terrorist attacks on sept . 
h.r. 2586 , department of defense authorization for fiscal year 2002 . 
h.r. 2944 , district of columbia appropriations for fiscal year 2002 . 
h.r. 3160 , bioterrorism enforcement act of 2001 . 
the bill established criminal penalties for the unsafe or illegal possession or transfer of certain biological agents and toxins -- including anthrax -- and it required the health and human services department ( hhs ) to develop new regulations governing the possession and use of those substances . 
when i first came here soon after the gentleman from illinois ( mr. lahood ) xz4002280 , i was struck that the showers that were available for our employees were kind of secret . 
i also appreciated comments that he made about the gem , which is the library of congress . 
we basically flatlined the library of congress , and we have missing from this , and part of the reduction is , the money that has been set aside for facilities to deal with the massive amount of information that is compiled by the library . 
the library of congress is the largest repository of information in the world . 
not only are they running out of space , running out of room , there are issues of being able to protect the materials that they have . 
and i am afraid that if we slip a year , then we slip another year , we end up putting a burden on the people who run the library of congress and we put part of that collection in jeopardy . 
look at what happened to the library of congress jefferson building being neglected for decades and it took a major renovation for the library , that gem that we are all so proud of , to be fit for use in time for its centennial . 
i know the committee has a difficult time because there are tight spending restraints , but i would urge the committee on appropriations and , indeed , each member of this body to take a careful look at our stewardship responsibilities for the library of congress . 
we all direct our constituents there because we are proud of it . 
we all take advantage of the material . 
this is an important little detail that is going to make their job harder ; and i am afraid in the long run , if we are not careful , it is going to be the abrogation of our responsibility to maintain this largest collection of information in the history of the world . 
and i hope that our distinguished chair and ranking member of the committee on appropriations will be able to , in fact , deal with this in conference in a serious manner because it is not just a matter here of saving over $ 5 million a year just in printing costs , and it is not a matter of saving some 57 tons of paper . 
what this is about is being able to , with all due deference to the ranking member , not impose on this congress a regimen of printing 6 , 000 copies of a relic of the past that is not necessary for everybody . 
there are 521 subscribers in america to the printed version of the & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; congressional record . 
they will be , under this amendment , available to any member of congress who wants them ; but it is important for us to have your help as members of the committee to be able to nudge us along to get into the 21st century . 
this is an opportunity for us to be able to take advantage of paperless activities , having paper where people need it , having a certified smart person who works for us print off what we need and save us the time not to thumb through to try and find it . 
this is symbolic of what we can do in the vast federal bureaucracy to break the stranglehold of past action and move to take advantage of this technology that we have invested , not hundreds of millions , but billions of dollars every year . 
i rise in support of the millender-mcdonald amendment and to express concern for the underlying bill . 
i am glad we are considering legislation that would address what should be done in the event of a large-scale incapacitation of congress . 
it is more essential than ever in a time of national emergency that democracy be preserved . 
our constitution established the house of representatives to provide directly elected representation in the event of a catastrophe that must be restored as quickly as possible . 
we have heard sort of grand , philosophical statements of our allegiance to democracy on the floor of this house ; but at the same time , we need to be practical about what actually can work in a time of national crisis . 
i think my friends on the other side of the aisle have glossed over the problems that especially military voters , the elderly , others who do not have access on an election day to the polls , the kind of problems that they would face . 
i was secretary of state in the 1980s for 8 years in the state of ohio , a large state with several million registered voters , a state that has always had a tradition of bipartisan elections conducted fairly . 
the year of 2004 may have been different where the election machinery frankly was not so well administered as it had been in the past by secretaries of state of both parties . 
that aside , i have serious concerns as a former secretary of state about the legislation we are considering today . 
there are alternatives , and i want to answer the concerns of the gentleman from wisconsin ( chairman sensenbrenner ) . 
i supported legislation last year that , as the gentleman from wisconsin ( chairman sensenbrenner ) said , was defeated , but could be considered in the light of understanding how elections actually work in that there needs to be a time line to get candidates on the ballots , to get the ballots printed , to get them sent to the armed forces around the world , and get those ballots back in time for an election . 
we want to refill , if you will , the house of representatives as quickly as possible , but we want to do it in the most democratic way possible , and ultimately that means giving the election machinery time so that everyone , especially our servicemen and -women overseas , so that everyone has access to the ballots . 
mr. speaker , by direction of the committee on rules , i call up house resolution 125 and ask for its immediate consideration . 
mr. speaker , for the purpose of debate only , i yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from florida ( mr. hastings ) xz4001701 , pending which i yield myself such time as i may consume . 
during consideration of this resolution , all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only . 
mr. speaker , on march 1 , the committee on rules met and granted a structured rule for h.r. 841 , the continuity in representation act of 2005 . 
i believe this is a fair rule that allows for a full discussion of the relevant points pertaining to the legislation before us . 
mr. speaker , h.r. 841 is an important step forward in addressing what are critical shortcomings in america 's plan for the continuity of this house in the event of an unexpected disaster or attack . 
while i was not a member of congress on september 11 , 2001 , i was in an office directly across lafayette park from the white house . 
one of the most significant memories i have is the bipartisan response to the tragedy where members stood on the steps of the capitol and let it be known to the world that our government would continue to operate . 
mr. speaker , the response of congress to 9/11 should never be forgotten . 
it takes an important step to ensure the preservation of our republic and the continuity of our government under the most trying of circumstances . 
mr. speaker , very simply , this legislation ensures a continuity of operations for the house of representatives . 
in the event that more than 100 members of congress are killed , the speaker may announce that `` exceptional circumstances '' exist and thereby trigger expedited special elections that must occur within 7 full weeks , thus ensuring the continuity of the house of representatives . 
mr. speaker , this legislation should not be very divisive based on the fact that a similar measure passed the house by a substantial bipartisan margin of 365 to 97 in the last session of congress . 
this legislation ensures the continuity of the people 's house . 
mr. speaker , you may well hear many members describe various provisions today in the context of federal election law . 
mr. speaker , simply put , this legislation is about the security and continuity of america 's governing institutions . 
it is an issue of critical importance in establishing an orderly response should the unthinkable occur again . 
the legislative history of this bill is clear . 
this bill originated in direct response to the events of september 11 . 
to confuse the former with the latter by encumbering this bill with extraneous issues would be to lose sight of the fundamental purpose of the legislation . 
our job here is to ensure the continuity of the house of representatives , not reform a state-based electoral process with federal legislation . 
during my time as secretary of state in oklahoma , the bombing of the alfred p. murrah federal building occurred . 
that incident and the larger tragedy of 9/11 are a sober warning that we should prepare for the unexpected before it occurs . 
h.r. 841 is an important part of that preparation , and it also is a tangible sign to terrorists that they will never intimidate this country , change the nature of this house as the elected representatives of the american people , or keep our government from facing any challenges it may face in the future . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i want to thank the gentleman for his kind words and i look forward to working with him as we move ahead and i learn from him as i already have in the context of the deliberations of the committee on rules . 
mr. speaker , i yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from california ( mr. dreier ) xz4001150 , the distinguished chairman of the committee on rules . 
mr. speaker , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
in closing , i would like to say i believe the debate has been an excellent discussion underlining many of the substantive concerns of both sides of a complex issue . 
but let us make one thing clear , this bill is about america 's security and the way that congress will deal with a catastrophe of unprecedented proportions . 
to ignore this basic fact is to ignore the warnings of history and the tragedy of september 11 . 
mr. speaker , today others have placed this debate in the context of election laws and constitutional issues . 
it is about establishing an orderly procedure to ensure the continuity of the house in the aftermath of a catastrophic event . 
we can not ignore those facts or ignore the realities and dangers of a changed international and geopolitical environment . 
this amendment makes in order another amendment to take one more step toward satisfying the concerns of the minority and the senate by extending the time limits by which states can hold elections . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time , and move the previous question on the amendment and on the resolution . 
mr. speaker , my motion to recommit would simply require that each state provide a minimum required number of functioning and accurate voting machines and poll workers for each precinct on the day of any special election . 
i do this and offer the amendment so that we can avoid the misallocation of voting machines and poll workers that occurred last year in the ohio presidential election that led to lines of sometimes 10 hours and disenfranchisement of tens of thousands of voters . 
consider the following : in franklin county in that state , 27 of the 30 wards with the most machines per registered voter showed majorities for bush while six of the seven wards with the fewest machines delivered the large margins for kerry . 
in columbus alone it is estimated that the misallocation of machines reduced the number of votes by up to 15 , 000 votes . 
there is also an investigation that revealed the franklin county election officials reduced the number of election voting machines assigned to downtown precincts and added them to suburbs . 
they used a formula based not on the number of registered voters but on past turnout . 
the election protection coalition testified that more than half the complaints about the long lines they received came from columbus and cleveland where a huge proportion of the state 's democratic voters lived . 
mr. speaker , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
i urge the support of the motion to recommit . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
the benefits of mounted patrols are recognized worldwide by law enforcement communities . 
transferring the horse mounted unit to the park police is inadequate to meet the security needs of the capitol complex . 
additionally , with the capitol police 's mounted unit dismantled , in the event the park police were able to respond , all of that manure that they were talking about , there would be no one to clean it , no mechanism in place . 
the mounted unit is an important component of the capitol police 's force to protect the capitol grounds . 
i and chief gainer believe that the mounted unit is an inexpensive and effective resource in guarding the capitol against potential threats , as well as an important part of improving community relations . 
it is my understanding that the cost of maintaining this unit for fiscal year 2006 is somewhere around $ 155 , 000 to $ 160 , 000 . 
additionally the work of one mounted officer is akin to the work of 10 officers on foot . 
in these dangerous times with constant and changing threats against the united states capitol complex , the capitol police deserve all of the tools that they deem necessary at their disposal . 
it has assisted with three arrests , worked 33 demonstrations , issued more than 200 notices of infraction , responded to assists in 9 reports of suspicious packages , responded to 16 calls for crowd control assistance , and responded to 28 calls for assistance in traffic accident incidents . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i heard my colleague from virginia say the cost is now up to three quarters of a million dollars . 
i do not think we are getting rid of the police officers ; i think we are just moving the five horses . 
as far as being something we do not need because the park police are already out there with their horses , let me state that the capitol grounds are statutorily defined , and because of that the park police do not have jurisdictions over the capitol grounds , it is my understanding . 
this program has only been in existence and operational since may of 2004 . 
the gao study , as the chairman stated , said that it is hard for them to quantify the benefits of the horse patrol because the performance measures are evolving , he failed to say the rest of it , and that data is still being collected on these measures . 
so we are trying to get rid of something that we have not even given a chance to see if it works . 
i have seven horses of my own . 
we have five horses here , and it certainly does not cost three-quarters of a million dollars , and we do not have to provide health benefits and retirement and the like to the horses . 
yes , the police officers do have the bicycles , but i would venture to say the guys on the bicycles are not sitting up as high as the guys and gals on top of the horses . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
he joined the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. sensenbrenner ) xz4003650 and me , along with former secretary of state candice miller and our distinguished colleagues , the gentleman from ohio ( mr. chabot ) xz4000710 , the gentleman from texas ( mr. paul ) xz4003110 , and the gentleman from maryland ( mr. bartlett ) xz4000170 , in co-sponsoring this legislation . 
as a former secretary of state , the gentleman from oklahoma ( mr. cole ) xz4000770 understands how important this issue is for us to address . 
i also want to express appreciation to my colleagues on the other side of the aisle . 
in the last congress , while it has not happened in this congress , i was very pleased that the distinguished ranking minority member of the committee on the judiciary , the gentleman from michigan ( mr. conyers ) xz4000800 , joined as a cosponsor of this legislation , as well as my good friend and colleague , the gentleman from california ( mr. berman ) xz4000250 . 
we all remember september 11 of 2001 . 
my judgment has often been questioned because i was the last human being to walk out of this building on september 11 of 2001 , and probably correctly . 
and i will say that when i left the building on september 11 , 2001 , i did so when one of the great capitol hill policemen said to me that there was a plane headed towards this building , and we all know now that that is the plane that went down with those very courageous passengers in pennsylvania . 
when we think back on september 11th , obviously it was one of the darkest days in the history of our republic , and it has led us to spend a great deal of time thinking about the unthinkable . 
because of september 11th , we have had to ponder things that we would never even possibly consider because of the fact that we had not seen that kind of attack on u.s. soil . 
but since that time , the speaker of the house has really stepped up to the plate and done a wide range of things that are designed to ensure that the people 's house and , in fact , we hope both houses of congress , are able to continue to function . 
if you recall on september 11th , late that afternoon , when members of both houses of congress , both political parties , stood on the east front of the capitol singing god bless america . 
the reason that members stood on the east front of the capitol was to let the american people and to let anyone know who would want to do us in , that we , as a nation , are strong , and this institution , the greatest deliberative body known to man , was continuing to function . 
so beginning almost immediately after the attacks of september 11th , the speaker took a number of steps that were designed to maintain the continuity of this great institution . 
he established the ability to effect a joint leadership recall from a period of adjournment through designees , and the requirement that the speaker submit to the clerk of the house a list of designees to act in the case of a vacancy in the office of the speaker . 
and , mr. speaker , we all know that at the beginning of this 109th congress , we included in our opening day rules package the provisions that allow the house to establish a quorum , which could be lowered if we go through a litany of roll call votes that would determine that many members had been incapacitated and could not actually show up to work here . 
i think it is important to note that we provided a number of protections in the use of that rule , including several that have been suggested by the members of the other side of the aisle . 
and i have to add , mr. speaker , that the speaker of the house and the minority leader , the gentlewoman from california ( ms. pelosi ) xz4003140 , have personally engaged and spent time talking about this very important issue . 
and it is my hope that we will , at the end of the day , end up with , as i said , a bipartisan compromise . 
some of those recommendations that came from members of the minority on this issue : extended roll calls lasting days at a time and excluding any time in recess so that members can contact the house and let us know that they can come to vote . 
the availability of the motion to adjourn at any time . 
the nonpartisan advice of the sergeant at arms , the capitol physician , and the medical and emergency personnel about the state of the membership of this body . 
and , mr. speaker , at the recommendation of the minority , consultation with the minority leader , in accordance with the traditional relationship between the speaker and the minority leader . 
the united states house of representatives does not operate unilaterally , so there will always be a check on any action taken under the mass incapacitation quorum provision . 
what i have been discussing , mr. speaker , answers how we will do the people 's work if a terrorist attack incapacitates large numbers of us . 
now , the continuity in representation act of 2005 , which we are considering here today , deals with how we will replenish the house if terrorists kill large numbers of our members . 
the gentleman from florida ( mr. hastings ) xz4001701 has just alluded to something , and while i know we do not enjoy the strong support of the minority on this , we have made a step in that we are going to have a manager 's amendment made in order that would allow us to move in the direction of what it is that the minority wants , and that is allowing for 49 days , which would be a full 7 weeks . 
let me say that this legislation addresses a number of very important matters and it incorporates a number of suggestions made , again by members on the other side of the aisle . 
they include more than doubling the amount of time for the special elections to occur from 21 days to 45 days . 
and i want to thank , particularly , the distinguished ranking minority member of the committee on armed services , the gentleman from missouri ( mr. skelton ) xz4003770 , for his fine work in that area and his commitment to ensure that we address the issue of military and overseas voters . 
you will recall when we considered this legislation , which at the end of the day drew large bipartisan support in the 108th congress , we were able to address the concerns that were raised by the gentleman from north carolina ( mr. watt ) xz4004240 at the end of the day when we were debating the legislation , and that is included in this . 
we allow states to have primaries and other options for selection of candidates for the special election so long as the general elections are completed within that period of time , which would be 49 days , excluding districts from the 49-day special election requirement if they already have either a general or special election scheduled , and including the four delegates and the resident commissioner of puerto rico within the provisions of the bill . 
last year , this legislation passed the house by a vote of 306 to 97 . 
i also have to say that on this rule itself we are very happy to have made in order the amendment of my colleague and neighbor , the very distinguished gentlewoman from california ( ms. millender-mcdonald ) xz4002750 , who has offered an amendment calling for 60 days . 
i also want to congratulate her , mr. speaker , on her new assignment as the ranking minority member of the committee on administration . 
i want to talk now , if i can , mr. speaker , about how this bill protects what i feel is a very , very key part of our responsibility here : our representation . 
i remember my mentor and the importance of the constitutional convention , and the great connecticut compromise of july 16 of 1787 . 
and i remember that date because we convened the congress in philadelphia to mark the bicentennial of the connecticut compromise back on july 16 of 1987 . 
of course , the federalists have been so important in explaining and justifying the actions of the framers as they put the constitution together . 
we all know that james madison was the father of our constitution , as well as having been president of the united states , he , as a matter of fact , was a member of the first committee on rules . 
and a relative of mine served on that committee on rules at the founding . 
madison wrote extensively about this institution , the house of representatives in federalists 52 through 57 . 
and one of the things i believe is very important for us to note is that madison talked about the absolutely critical importance of this institution being elected . 
now , mr. speaker , we all know that the 435 of us who serve as members of the house of representatives are the only federal officials who must be elected before we can serve . 
and we all know from the example of president ford , one can be appointed to serve as vice president and president of the united states without having been elected . 
in federalist 52 madison wrote : `` it is essential to liberty that the government in general should have a common interest with the people , so it is particularly essential that the branch of it under consideration should have an immediate dependence on and an intimate sympathy with the people . 
frequent elections are unquestionably the only policy by which this dependence and sympathy can be effectively secured. '' he went on in federalist 57 and wrote : `` who are to be the electors of the federal representatives ? 
not the rich more than the poor , not the learned more than the ignorant , not the haughty heirs of distinguished names more than the humble sons of obscurity and unpropitious fortune . 
the electors are to be the great body of the people of the united states. '' and , mr. speaker , madison rejected the idea that appointment of members is acceptable to the american public . 
he said , and i quote : `` the right of suffrage is certainly one of the fundamental articles of democratic government and ought not be regulated by the legislature . 
a gradual abridgement of this right has been the mode in which aristocracies have been built on the ruin of popular forms. '' i think it is very important for us to understand that there have been times in our nation 's history where we have faced greater difficulty than the difficulty that we face today , or even greater difficulty than we faced following september 11 of 2001 , and that was the civil war . 
if we think back to that time of the civil war , we have to remember that this capitol was surrounded by troops who were threatening the very being of our republic . 
and , of course , we have the newest example of self-determination in the world . 
the brave people of iraq recently tasted freedom and the joy of elections . 
because there was a great deal of tension . 
but we know that despite the bombs and the snipers and the fear of death , people exercised that very important right to self-determination . 
we too are a democracy borne out of facing down aristocracy and tyranny ourselves , and we should never forget that for one moment . 
mr. speaker , i am convinced that as we look at the struggles taking place in iraq today , that building and reinforcing democratic institutions is crucial for the safety , security , and happiness of a nation 's people , whether it is the people of iraq or the people of the united states of america . 
that is why when we looked at some of the other options to provide for our continuity as an institution , such as the stand-in appointments provision that the house overwhelmingly defeated last year , we should ask what we lose if we , for one moment , give up on elections . 
and i say that elections are particularly important during a time of a national emergency . 
i believe that when we take this very , very unique institution , the people 's house , where no one has served without having first been elected , and move away from elections , that we threaten the very basis of our strength as a democratic nation . 
thus as we look at the very tough challenge of how to preserve our democracy in the face of catastrophe , this legislation is the most responsible way to continue the legitimacy of our government . 
if we look at the tragic loss of more than 100 members , the idea of having the states hold special elections in that period of time is something that is doable . 
in the time of a horrible tragedy , feeding and clothing one 's family , making sure the roof is over their head , and then playing a role in picking one 's leaders , that is all part of the process of rebuilding . 
and it can be done in a relatively short period of time . 
my colleague ( ms. millender-mcdonald ) xz4002750 and i represent the state of california . 
we had the recall of a governor and an election that took place in 55 days . 
it was not a single congressional district of 650 , 000 people with two or three candidates . 
that race had 135 candidates on the ballot , and they were running among a populace of 35 million people . 
this rule allows for consideration of measures that address that . 
i do oppose that proposal because i believe that the notion of moving to 49 days will allow us to work this out very well . 
mr. chairman , i thank the distinguished gentleman from california , the chairman of the committee on appropriations , for yielding me this time ; and i want to congratulate him on the fine work that he has done , not only on this legislation , but on all of the appropriations bills . 
we have had three markups on this issue , two in the committee on house administration , one in the committee on the judiciary , and we had 122 democrats who joined with us in support of a responsible piece of legislation which , in fact , encourages the madisonian vision of an elected people 's house . 
it was the distinguished chairman of the committee on appropriations who just said we had that debate . 
sixty-three members of this house chose to support a constitutional amendment . 
the only reason that we are here at this moment having this debate is that the other body has refused , last year and since march of this year , to proceed with acting on this house 's housekeeping matter . 
it is a housekeeping matter for the house of representatives to maintain the process of elections . 
now , i think that if we look at the debate that we have had , if we look at the fact that we have continued since september 11 of 2001 to focus on a wide range of matters that impact this institution and the challenge that we never faced in our history , i believe that having this very important legislation that was passed by a margin of 329 in this congress , 329 to 68 , that including it now in the legislative appropriations bill is the most appropriate way to deal with it . 
we chose in the committee on rules to allow the gentleman from washington ( mr. baird ) xz4000110 to have an opportunity to strike this measure ; and in just a few minutes , we are going to , once again , have a vote on whether or not we allow the process of elections to go ahead . 
now , it is very true , it is very true that it would be difficult , it would be messy , it would be ugly ; but walter dellinger , the former solicitor general , a great constitutional scholar from duke university , made it very clear in his testimony before the committee on rules , when we talked about this issue , that he would prefer to see a house of representatives that is comprised of fewer members that are actually elected by the people than would be appointed . 
under the constitutional amendment that my friend supports , we could see this institution , the people 's house , consist of individuals who are appointed making decisions over those who are elected ; and i think that is counter to the entire intention that was put forward by the framers of our constitution . 
mr. chairman , i would like to begin by yielding 2 minutes to the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. sensenbrenner ) xz4003650 , the distinguished chairman of the judiciary committee , with whom i have been very pleased to work on this issue really since september 11 , 2001 . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of the time . 
mr. chairman , james madison said the problems of democracy are solved with more democracy . 
but i would like to remind my colleagues that the civil war was a very tough time for the united states of america . 
in fact , the battle of antietam saw southern troops get within miles of this capitol . 
the president of the united states , abraham lincoln , made a very firm decision at that point : proceed with elections . 
now , when we think of the unthinkable , a tragic attack which would be launched against the united states of america , what is it that the people would do ? 
and , mr. chairman , a very important part of coming together following a tragedy is the important role of choosing one 's leaders . 
yes , they can do that as members of the other body . 
yes , that can even happen for the chief executive of the country . 
and this notion of creating a scenario whereby people could serve in the people 's house without having first been elected is anathema to the entire basis on which the united states of america was founded . 
forty-nine days is the amount of time during which people could come together and hold elections and have their representative , that is why we are called representatives , their representative could come here and have the chance to serve . 
it is very clear to me that the house of representatives has , as has been said , spoken . 
sixty-three members of 435 voted in favor of our proceeding with a constitutional amendment . 
and so , mr. chairman , i urge my colleagues to reject the baird amendment , and create an opportunity for us to let the other body act on a house provision which is so vitally important to the deliberative nature of this great body . 
mr. chairman , i support this amendment to strike legislation which has nothing to do with the appropriations process , legislation which has been improperly placed in this bill , the text of h.r. 841 , the `` continuity in representation act of 2005. '' that bill has already passed the house twice , in slightly different forms , in the spring of 2004 and most recently on march 3 , 2005 . 
as ranking member of the committee of actual jurisdiction , the committee on house administration , i have never been consulted by the majority about beginning negotiations with the senate to try to resolve the objections and get a bill which can clear both chambers . 
congress consists of two chambers . 
unfortunately , some of the house sponsors appear to be treating a controversial and sensitive subject as if it were a perk of the house , as though the house alone somehow had acquired , contrary to the constitution and other federal laws , the right to control the procedure under which its members are elected . 
it was obvious that the committee had no idea what it was being asked to do and , based on the thunderous chorus of `` nays '' on the voice vote , was reluctant to be forced to do it . 
mr. chairman , h.r. 841 is under the jurisdictions of the committee on house administration . 
if this bill is to be saved , let the members who care about and understand the issues engage seriously with those of differing views . 
i urge adoption of the baird amendment to strike title 3 . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
beside me i have a stack of & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; congressional records . 
it used to be that the government printing office would print thousands and thousands and thousands of these because we did not use computers much . 
we did an informal survey in our office of the & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; congressional record . 
overwhelmingly , nearly all of them said it goes straight to the wastepaper basket because we have it online now , a searchable data base . 
it used to be that we needed a lot more of them than we need today . 
this would also save about 57 tons of paper that are discarded every year , and all of the environmental damage that goes along with that . 
for us to go on printing 6 , 000 of these a day when we simply do not need them is not right . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i am willing to save time and money , and i yield back the balance of my time . 
they fought a revolution for freedom against a power that at that time was much greater than the sum of this nation . 
today , even though times have changed , the spirit of mason lives on . 
and with god 's blessing we will never have to use this piece of legislation . 
but we have to seriously consider the issue of the continuity in congress . 
we have specifically designed authority to other members of this body to call the house back into session should i not be here to do it . 
we have changed the rules of the house to allow it to function if members are incapacitated . 
and in keeping with the great traditions of our country , we need to keep it that way . 
it was improved by the congress with various amendments , many from the other side of the aisle , which the gentleman from ohio ( mr. ney ) xz4002930 has incorporated into this bill . 
i discussed with the democratic leader the idea of increasing the number of days from 45 to 49 , 7 weeks , to provide the 7 weeks for these special elections . 
however , 60 days is too long a time for the framework of the national crisis because of our role under the war powers act . 
the bill we had adopted last congress with the support of 306 members was a very good bill . 
what makes america great is that we can come together during times of national tragedy . 
in the event of the unthinkable , this bill strikes a blow to the heart of the terrorists and allows this body to reconstitute itself as quickly as possible , therefore carrying on the spirit of mason and of this great nation . 
i urge the defeat of the motion to recommit . 
i urge the passage of this bill . 
this is the first rule of which i hope are many that the gentleman and i are managing together . 
this is an issue of grave importance to the american people and the integrity of that democracy in times of dire crisis . 
the decision of the majority to place any restrictions on this body prohibiting members from offering amendments and freely debating the subject is not responsible . 
the terrorist attacks of september 11 changed the way that we as a country operate . 
even more , the product of 3 years of discussion on the issue that the majority is bringing to the floor is incomplete , unrealistic , and fails to consider the implications of changing statute when we should be amending the united states constitution . 
the underlying legislation requires the states to hold special elections within 45 days in the case of extraordinary circumstances . 
should this time period be adopted , it would undoubtedly result in the disenfranchisement of millions , including seniors who vote absentee , our diplomatic corps , and our men and women serving in our armed forces . 
this is more of a cosmetic and convenient change than substantive . 
it still sets up a process that will lead to the selection of members of congress who are potentially not the real choice of the citizenry . 
all of this is happening at the same time my friends in the majority have blocked democratic members from offering three different amendments to the bill , all of which were germane and all of which were turned in on time . 
it seems to me that we operate under two rules in the house of representatives : one for them and one for us . 
i hope that members of this body will place the integrity of our democracy above petty politics and vote to adopt the millender-mcdonald amendment . 
it has suggested that states create lists of possible appointments to seats vacated due to mass causality to ensure that the house can continue to operate while states move forward with their own special elections process . 
but he certainly has been a stalwart leader in the effort to do what is necessary to preserve the integrity of this body . 
in my view , it was cutthroat politics , and we should not allow for those kind of actions . 
it does not address how the house quorum rules will work in the case of mass house vacancies . 
if the underlying legislation is dropped , the legitimacy of actions taken by a shorthanded congress , most likely during a time of war , would always be in question . 
regardless of the house 's decisions today , states and voters must ultimately approve this process through a constitutional amendment . 
it took less than 14 months to approve each of the 17th , 18th , 19th , 20th , 21st , 23rd , and 26th amendments respectively . 
all of these concerns underscore the need for this body to consider this legislation in an open and much larger discussion on the continuity of our government during times of mass causality . 
the effects of our hastiness today may not be felt while any of us are alive , but at some point in the future our successors and our states will be trapped by poor decisions we might make today . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
i have great respect for the gentleman from california ( mr. dreier ) xz4001150 , and i know that he knows that the 17th amendment of the united states constitution speaks to continuity . 
i also know that he knows that the congress , for purposes of preserving our institutions , allowed for the development of a continuity-of-government commission . 
on that commission a significant number of outstanding individuals from america , a broad cross-section of them , came up with the notion that it was critical that we have a constitutional amendment to go forward . 
let me name some of the people that were on that commission : lloyd cutler ; alan simpson ; philip chase bobbitt ; kenneth duberstein ; tom foley , former speaker of the house ; robert michel , minority leader ; newt gingrich , former speaker of the house ; nicholas b. katzenbach ; jamie gorelick ; robert katzmann ; kweisi mfume ; lynn martin ; donna shalala ; and their senior counselors were norman orenstein and thomas mann . 
what they said in the very preamble of their document is the following : we held two public meetings where we heard testimony from experts , and in the course of our investigation , we explored a wide range of options short of a constitutional amendment to ameliorate or solve these problems . 
the commissioners , all of those persons that i just identified , shared distaste for frivolous or unnecessary amendments to the constitution . 
and the chairman of the committee on rules spoke of james madison . 
no greater or eminent scholar that laid the foundation perhaps , other than jefferson , dealt with all of the issues that they contemplated in their time . 
we had a vote on whether or not there should be an open rule in this important process for america , and we had an amendment offered by a distinguished member of this body , the gentleman from minnesota ( mr. sabo ) xz4003540 , requiring states to offer same-day voter registration for special elections held in accordance with this bill . 
my colleague from new york ( mr. nadler ) xz4002890 , who lost more people than all of us combined in the 9/11 tragedy , offered a measure to prohibit deceiving any person as to the time , place , or eligibility requirements of special elections held in accordance with this bill . 
and the gentleman from michigan ( mr. conyers ) xz4000800 , the ranking member of the committee on the judiciary , offered an amendment that would require states to equally and fairly distribute election personnel and equipment when it conducts the special elections contemplated in this bill . 
all three of those civil rights measures went down the tube with the closed rule . 
i end by saying that thomas mann of the brookings institution , who was one of the lead authors of the continuity commission 's report , stated in front of the committee on house administration the following : `` the inability to swiftly constitute the house and senate would deprive the country of a fully functioning first branch of government at a time of grave national crisis . 
unable to achieve a quorum , or relying on a questionable quorum interpretation allowing a small minority , possibly a handful of surviving members to act for the full chamber , congress would be unable to legitimately elect a new speaker or confirm a new vice president , both critical links in presidential succession . 
mr. madison offered the 17th amendment to the united states constitution that has held well through the years with reference to continuity , and we owe no less responsibility to those founders to be mindful of our responsibilities in that regard by offering up to the american people an appropriate constitutional amendment to be debated and decided by the people of this great country . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
i rise today to offer an amendment to cut 1 percent of the level of funding in this appropriation bill . 
they have done some very good things in here , particularly in that hole of waste we have in the east front of our capitol which goes on and on and on . 
i simply think that with all of these appropriation bills , with most of them , we can find 1 percent to cut , and that will move us in a tiny way towards a balanced budget . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i want to inquire of the distinguished gentleman from wisconsin ( chairman sensenbrenner ) , i have an amendment in the nature of a substitute . 
in the spirit of collegiality , i realize that we have a rule , but i gained a sense that the committee on house administration would be supportive of this substitute which would only allow an added 5 days for an appeal from 2 days , less than a week . 
i would inquire of the chairman of the committee on the judiciary , would the gentleman allow that to move forward by unanimous consent ? 
this is the problem we have here today , and that is the continuity and the preservation of this historic and honorable institution , the members of the united states congress , really should be a bipartisan process . 
i am disappointed we are not , even in time of death and tragedy , terrorism , that we can not find in our hearts and in our intellectual minds the ability to be collegial and to work in an very informed and thoughtful way . 
one , the amendment has the expansion of the ability of an aggrieved party to file suit for either declaratory or injunctive relief from just 2 days to 5 days . 
this is a question to answer the needs of the secretaries of state and the states that when this crisis occurs , that all of them have the procedures in place to be able to fulfill our democratic calling . 
number 2 of this amendment is a provision for an expedited appeals process to the united states district court for matters rising out of the special election process because a 45-day deadline for special state election already places significant constraints on the electoral process and on the citizens represented due to its brevity , taking away the right to an appeal to the u.s. district court . 
in addition , this provides for an expansion of the right to sue for declaratory judgment beyond the governor , but to citizens and classes of citizens . 
mr. chairman , the gravity of the matter of reconstituting the house of representatives in the face of catastrophe requires the fullest debate possible . 
however , due to the fact that a structured rule was reported out of committee , this body is relegated to saving this severely flawed legislation by way of the only two amendments made in order last tuesday -- those of my colleague , the distinguished ranking member of the house administration committee and the jackson-lee amendment . 
the jackson-lee amendment has three essential components which propose to preserve the rights of the states , the voters , and of the spirit of democracy : the first portion of this amendment , jackson-lee # 1 , reads as follows : in section 26 ( b ) ( 4 ) ( b ) ( i ) of the revised statutes of the united states , as proposed to be added by the bill , strike `` 2 days '' and insert `` 5 days. '' this change would amend the section of the bill that deals with the time in which a person ( s ) may file a lawsuit arising out of the speaker of the house 's announcement of vacancies in the house of representatives in excess of 100 . 
this change would amend paragraph ( 4 ) , subparagraph ( b ) ( i ) and expand the ability of an aggrieved party to file suit for either declaratory or injunctive party to file suit for either declaratory or injunctive relief from just two ( 2 ) days to five ( 5 ) days . 
the principle of procedural due process dictates that every citizen of each state have a realistic opportunity to obtain legal relief through our judicial branch . 
the second portion of this proposal speaks even more to the issue of due process for all citizens . 
its text reads as follows : in section 26 ( b ) ( 4 ) ( b ) ( iii ) of the revised statues of the united states , as proposed to be added by the bill , insert after `` the action '' the following : `` ( taking into account an opportunity for an expedited appeal of the initial decision ) . '' . 
given that the time in which a federal judge has to compose an order disposing of these matters is provided in this bill , an equally expeditious appeals process should be provided so as to maintain consistency with the u.s. constitution and the commitment to both the 5th and 14th amendments . 
thirdly , the amendment reads as follows : in section 26 ( b ) ( 4 ) ( b ) ( iv ) of the revised statutes of the united states , as proposed to be added by the bill , insert after `` vacant '' the following : `` any citizen of the district or any group of citizens of the state. '' . 
this proposal is very important to protect the interests of all citizens in the various congressional districts in the midst of party politics as well as the certification of classes in legal actions . 
as the bill is drafted , section 2 , paragraph ( 4 ) , subparagraph ( iv ) would confer the right to sue in the event of a vacancy announcement by the speaker of the house solely to the `` executive authority , '' in the case of texas , the governor . 
such overly restrictive language almost certainly threatens to deprive the citizens of a right that they should enjoy in the event that the governor chooses not to participate in a suit for declaratory or injunctive relief pursuant to a vacancy announcement made by the speaker of the house . 
in order to protect the rights of every person who truly has an interest in a call for a special election under this act , this provision must be amended to allow citizens and classes of citizens to sue for relief . 
mr. chairman , i ask that my colleagues support the voters of each state , the framework of the u.s. constitution , and the spirit of democracy by supporting the jackson-lee amendment . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
there is no definition of how the announcement will go out to the people beyond the beltway . 
i would indulge and beg my colleagues to realize all this does is simply allow for the people of america in crisis to be represented and to be responded to . 
mr. chairman , i yield 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from california ( ms. millender-mcdonald ) xz4002750 , the ranking member of the committee on house administration . 
mr. chairman , i rise in strong support of the jackson-lee amendment . 
a portion of the gentlewoman 's amendment seeks to provide an expedited appeals process to the united states district court for matters arising out of the special election process . 
taking away the right of an appeal to united states district court would excessively curtail the procedural due process rights enjoyed by citizens . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time , and thank the gentlewoman for her support . 
again , the idea of this amendment , in the judicial review aspect , one , there is no definitive information about how the information will be disseminated to our states and to citizens in a 2-day period if crisis is occurring , if a terrorist act has occurred . 
in addition , the other aspects of the legislation provides for an expedited time frame . 
it does not in any way cause a sufficient delay that would not allow us to restore this body to its ability to do business on behalf of the american people . 
and i think we would not want the terrorists to believe that because of a terrorist act that we have lost our sense of judgment , the constitution and due process . 
after 9/11 , we went to new york to show that we are not afraid of the terrorists . 
i believe we should show that we are not afraid of them by upholding the constitution and due process on behalf of the american people . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise today in support of h.r. 2985 the legislative branch appropriations for fiscal year 2006 . 
however , i find it truly unfortunate that these appropriations were consistently under-funded because of the tight budget due to the massive tax cuts given to the richest americans . 
this bill appropriates $ 1.1 billion for operations of the house of representatives which is only $ 13 million ( 1 % ) more than current funding and $ 35 million ( 3 % ) less than requested . 
it is unfortunate that these appropriations are so tight , when the cost of operating the house of representatives is in fact getting higher . 
these costs are becoming higher because the needs of our constituencies are becoming greater . 
regardless of these cuts , congress will continue to function properly and we will serve our constituents proudly , but these cuts in our funding undermine our efforts . 
in addition to insufficient funding to the house of representatives , the greatest deficiencies can be found in the legislative branch agencies that directly or indirectly support congressional operations . 
the architect of the capitol who have worked so hard in the last year to make the capitol complex more accessible to visitors received only $ 317.3 million , $ 16.7 million ( 6 % ) more than current funding but a full $ 123.6 million ( 28 % ) less than requested . 
the government printing office ( gpo ) which serves the demanding printing needs of hundreds of legislators every year received only $ 122.6 million which is $ 2.8 million ( 2 % ) more than current funding but $ 8.5 million ( 6 % ) less than requested . 
indeed , even the library of congress , the resource for members and staff to conduct research and the institution meant to be our nation 's greatest repository of reading materials , even their funding was cut in this appropriation . 
the library of congress received $ 543 million , about equal to the fy 2005 level but $ 47.8 million ( 8 % ) less than requested . 
however , the issue that has me most concerned about this appropriation is the language of h.r. 841 , which would require states to hold special elections within 49 days of the speaker declaring that more than 100 vacancies exist in the house . 
first of all , this language has no business being in this appropriations measure , it clearly legislates on what is supposed to be a spending bill . 
truly , the other side of the aisle is trying to sneak in a piece of legislation within this appropriation in order to force its passage upon the senate . 
the more expedited the process of replacing despite my objections with certain provisions of this legislation i will vote in favor of this appropriation because it serves the needs of our congress . 
it is my sincere hope that the institution of congress , which was made to serve the needs of the people , will continue to be effective no matter the obstacle . 
mr. chairman , i rise today in strong support of my colleague mr. baird 's amendment to h.r. 2985 the legislative branch appropriations for fiscal year 2006 . 
the baird amendment would strike the language of h.r. 841 , which would require states to hold special elections within 49 days of the speaker declaring that more than 100 vacancies exist in the house . 
first of all , this language has no business being in this appropriations measure , it clearly legislates on what is supposed to be a spending bill . 
truly , the other side of the aisle is trying to sneak in a piece of legislation within this appropriation in order to force its passage upon the senate . 
the more expedited the process of replacing the members of the house and the smaller the body constituted is , the less legitimacy it will have . 
in the event of a catastrophic disaster , elections should be held on an expedited time schedule . 
the pillars of what makes american democracy unique , however , should not be toppled in the pursuit to do so . 
under the guidelines of this language , this would not be possible . 
all debate of the candidates ' platforms or characters would be nearly muted , and in effect , americans would vote `` in the blind. '' significant disenfranchisement will likely occur in the unrealistic time frame that the language of h.r. 841 offers in this appropriations measure . 
there is something unseemly about denying our men and women of the military the right to vote in the most consequential elections imaginable , when we would be replacing perhaps the entire house . 
there are the language of h.r. 841 in this bill proposes to make the issue of state elections a `` federal question. '' however , just because this issue would become federalized does not mean that we should frustrate the essential elements of democracy.the processes of establishing the eligibility of state candidates , voter registration , voter freedom of choice , and equal access to voting under the civil rights act must be preserved -- even in the face of a catastrophe . 
clearly , this language does not belong in this appropriations bill , nor does it serve the best interest of the american people . 
this bill appropriates $ 1.1 billion for operations of the house of representatives which is only $ 13 million ( 1 percent ) more than current funding and $ 35 million ( 3 percent ) less than requested . 
it is unfortunate that these appropriations are so tight , when the cost of operating the house of representatives is in fact getting higher . 
these costs are becoming higher because the needs of our constituencies are becoming greater . 
regardless of any possible cuts , congress will continue to function properly and we will serve our constituents proudly , but these cuts in our funding undermine our efforts . 
in addition to insufficient funding to the house of representatives , the greatest reason to reject the hefley amendment can be found in the legislative branch agencies that directly or indirectly support congressional operations . 
the architect of the capitol who have worked so hard in the last year to make the capitol complex more accessible to visitors received only $ 317.3 million , $ 16.7 million ( 6 percent ) more than current funding but a full $ 123.6 million ( 28 percent ) less than requested . 
the government printing office ( gpo ) which serves the demanding printing needs of hundreds of legislators every year received only $ 122.6 million which is $ 2.8 million ( 2 percent ) more than current funding but $ 8.5 million ( 6 percent ) less than requested . 
indeed , even the library of congress , i urge all my colleagues to reject the hefley amendment as its passage will only make it more difficult for us to meet the needs of the american people . 
it takes a lot to keep the great halls of congress going and it is our responsibility to ensure that all of it is properly funded . 
mr. chairman , first of all , i want to extend thanks to the chairman of the full committee on appropriations , the gentleman from california ( mr. lewis ) xz4002391 . 
by this time next week , we will have completed all of the appropriation bills . 
this is a history-making event in the house of representatives . 
i have been here for 11 years ; and for the 11 years i have been here , i do not know of another time when we have completed all of our appropriation bills going right up to the july 4 recess break . 
that is in large part due to the cooperation that the chairman received from the ranking member , the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 , but in large part also from the leadership exhibited by the chairman of the full committee . 
he set a very , very high bar , a high standard , and all of the subcommittee chairs comported with that ; and we will have sent to the senate all of our appropriation bills as of a week from today or a week from tomorrow . 
that is an accomplishment that should not go unnoticed , and i compliment the gentleman from california ( mr. lewis ) xz4002391 and the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 for their leadership and also the subcommittee chairmen for that kind of goal setting and then meeting those goals . 
this is the bill where we say to all of the people , and i personally say to all of the people around the capitol campus , thank you for the good work you do . 
the clerks , the people taking down our words here , the & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; congressional record that will be printed overnight , the parliamentarians who do such good work in directing the proceedings of the house , all of the capitol hill police who stand guard 24-7 and protect the capitol , the attending physician 's office who keep us all healthy , the people who work in the cloakrooms , the people who help us write bills , the people at crs who help us make sure that we get the words correct and get them done correctly in the bills that we prepare and take a lot of credit for . 
the folks who work at the library of congress . 
the most magnificent facility on the capitol campus is the library of congress . 
i hate to say it , but it is even more magnificent than this building , but the library of congress is a magnificent facility . 
members have an opportunity to take full advantage of many of the books there and research that can be done . 
the botanical gardens is also a part of our campus . 
this is the bill that funds all of that . 
this is congress ' opportunity to say thank you to all of the people who work around here . 
it includes the lawyers who make sure that we do things correctly , and all of the people who work hard day and night to keep this building open , keep members on the right track , and make sure that the things we do are done by the book . 
so i pay my compliments to all of the people who make this magnificent facility that we call the united states capitol the great place that it is , where we make the laws and have the debates and have the opportunity to represent the people from all over the country . 
we could not do it without this bill , without the funding in this bill , and we could not do it without the people who provide all of the services , and are very dedicated , many of whom work late hours to keep this place going . 
a lot of the work that has been done has been done by direction of staff of the principals . 
and after 9/11 , we do not want people standing outside , we do not want people standing in inclement weather , and there will be an opportunity for people to get a little bit of history before they enter the capitol . 
to say we should throw the whole bill out because of the visitors center does not make sense . 
i also want to say something about a subject i have felt very strongly about for the last few years , thank the architect and the chief operating officer and others for helping me with this , and that is the development of a staff health fitness center . 
there will be a health fitness center that they will be able to take advantage of , to stay healthy and be able to exercise , to have an opportunity to do the same thing that all of the members have the opportunity to do . 
i am grateful that we are finally getting that kind of opportunity for our staff to be able to make this happen . 
with respect to the provision that was put in the bill having to do with respect to what do we do around here if another disaster happens , if the members are injured or killed in some kind of an attack , there has to be something that guides the direction of the house in the event that something happens . 
my point is the idea that this was included and is some sort of nonessential thing , it is essential that we have a provision in the law that allows us to account for a situation in the event that members need to be replaced . 
it is a part of the process here . 
if we want to get things moving , this is one of the ways to do it . 
i ask every member to consider the good work that goes on around here , the fact that this is the bill that funds all of this . 
this is the bill that takes care of all of the work that we do around here . 
my compliments go to the gentleman from california ( mr. lewis ) xz4002391 and the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 and the work of the staff people that made it possible for this bill to come to the floor today . 
there is absolutely nothing for the members of congress to do . 
there is not going to be anything for any member of congress , any major decisions to be made during that period of time . 
all of the major legislation that was created was created long after the period of time that the gentleman is talking about . 
now , for the aesthetic part of it , it might be lovely ; but for the security part of it , it is nonsense . 
it is a waste of money . 
mr. chairman , as ranking member of the committee on house administration , which has jurisdiction over the united states capitol police , i rise to oppose the amendment offered by my friend from virginia ( ms. jo ann davis ) . 
it reportedly came into existence as the brainchild of a senator from colorado , now retired , without any formal examination of the merits and demerits of using horses in the capitol police environment . 
unlike the u.s. park police , which must patrol thousands of acres of wooded parkland in northwest washington , the capitol police patrols a confined area readily accessible to non-mounted officers , and much of which is not even accessible to the public at all . 
however , on those occasions where crowds needing control may develop on the capitol grounds -- and these occasions are usually well anticipated -- the capitol police can easily ask for assistance from their park police colleagues , who are well trained in the use of horses and can also be trained about the capitol and working here . 
finally , some offer the intangible value of public relations as a justification for spending the hundreds of thousands to maintain the horses and train their handlers . 
but what about the public relations cost of the horse manure deposited across the grounds , and the tens of thousands it costs to clean it up ? 
many of my colleagues , including the gentleman from washington ( mr. baird ) xz4000110 , the gentleman from california ( mr. cox ) xz4000830 , the gentleman from ohio ( mr. ney ) xz4002930 and the gentlewoman from california ( ms. millender-mcdonald ) xz4002750 have tried to encourage dialogue on this matter , but this bill simply does not address many of the concerns raised by members and outside experts during the last 3 1/2 years . 
if under h.r. 841 the house experienced the deaths of more than 100 members , the speaker could direct states to conduct special elections now within 49 days . 
well , mr. chairman , i am sure that the authors of this legislation had all the good intentions in the world , but unfortunately we find in the real world , in practice , it does not always work out as we had intended . 
as a former secretary of state , i have run numerous elections , and i can tell you that the 49-day limit would constrain election officials ' ability to prepare ballots , train poll workers , select polling locations , and inform the voting public about the process . 
i want to remind everyone that in the 6 weeks after the attacks of september 11 , congress passed legislation authorizing the use of military force , an airline assistance measure , an economic stimulus bill , the defense authorization act , numerous appropriation bills , the farm bill , legislation pertaining to bioterrorism , victims assistance , and terrorism financing . 
worse , in the case of widespread incapacitation , the house would be unable to achieve a quorum and become inoperative during a time of crisis . 
a recent change in house rules tried to circumvent this problem by creating a provisional quorum , which would permit a smaller number of members to constitute a quorum in emergency circumstances . 
however , one must question the constitutionality and public support of laws that would be passed by a handful of members during a time of national crisis . 
but i am disappointed that h.r. 841 does not take a comprehensive approach to continuity nor does it address a priority of mine , deciding how congress could communicate and function if terrorist acts prevented it from meeting in one location . 
the legislative branch bill , mr. chairman , provides for $ 2.870 billion , an increase of only 1.7 percent over the fiscal year 2005 . 
while small in size , this is the bill that funds the work of the congress , and it is a bill that we all can be very proud of . 
the bill includes funding for the operations of the house and several joint items , the capitol police , the compliance board , the congressional budget office , the architect of the capitol , the library of congress , the government printing office , the general accountability office , and the open world leadership program . 
the bill also was reported out of the full committee on a voice vote . 
the capitol visitor center is funded at the cost-to-complete level of $ 36.9 million . 
as part of an amendment in the full committee , i offered , and the committee adopted , the continuity in representation act at the speaker 's request . 
ultimately , this is the bill that reflects the work of the house . 
we are all in this together , mr. chairman , and because of that , i feel very strongly that this legislation should have the support of the entire house . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
as we have discussed , the smoking policy in the house office buildings is under the jurisdiction of the house office building commission . 
that commission is made up of leaders on both sides of the aisle ; and , frankly , i am very hesitant to interfere with their responsibility or their work . 
mr. chairman , let me tell the gentleman that i am very appreciative of his interest in the institution 's history . 
as he is aware , the speaker controls the placement of plaques on the house side of the capitol . 
their placement is very restricted , and we attempt to achieve recognition of events and places normally through other means . 
the capitol visitors center is being designed to provide our visitors with a much fuller understanding and history of the house and senate . 
in this exhibit hall , the architectural and legislative history of the institution are highlighted . 
as part of the currently proposed cvc exhibits are detailed sections on the history of the capitol and included in this is the fact that when the capitol was originally built , it was used for more than legislative meetings . 
it was commonly used as the community center for the citizens of washington , d.c . 
all these facts are included in the cvc exhibits , and i would encourage that the education of citizens be pursued in this venue so that a more complete history beyond a plaque can be presented . 
mr. chairman , i rise to yield time to the gentleman from california ( mr. dreier ) xz4001150 ; but before doing so , i just want to mention that the previous speaker had a constitutional amendment regarding the issue of continuity in the last congress , and on that constitutional amendment the vote was 63 yeas and 353 nays . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of the time . 
mr. chairman , reclaiming my time , i think it is important for the public to know that all of us are concerned about continuity of government in the event of a tragedy . 
my colleague , the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 , and i , early on in this congress , were not active supporters of a cvc . 
indeed , within the mix of that , while i might change some things , i prefer not to suggest what the details ought to be that the architect moves forward with . 
i am critical of the architect ; but in the meantime , i am not one . 
therefore , we are going to add this major change whereby visitors can enter the capitol , and it will have a very significant piece of our future history in the capitol complex . 
indeed , it will be a very high-quality addition that we will all be proud of , but i think it would be a mistake for me to try to be the architect between now and then . 
so with that , mr. chairman , this has been a very interesting debate about the work of the people 's house . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise to claim the time in opposition to the amendment , and i ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 control 2 1/2 minutes of that time . 
as a matter of fact , at one time in my life i thought i might be a veterinarian because i loved horses and ducks so much . 
gao was not able to substantiate the claim of one horse doing the work of 10 people . 
i do not see how the elimination of five horses is going to impact the patrol . 
the real point is here i was concerned about the horses myself , but when the staff came up with the thought that perhaps we could transfer them to the park service and make sure they are well taken care of and used for meaningful activity , i felt very comfortable with this change . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from illinois ( mr. lahood ) xz4002280 . 
mr. chairman , i ask unanimous consent to yield 2 1/2 minutes of that time to the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 for purposes of control . 
this is a decrease of $ 2.5 million below the 2004 level . 
the record is distributed in accordance with title 44 , chapter 9 of the u.s. code ; and within that there are 3 , 000 copies that go to members , of the house and senate , 153 copies to the library of congress , et cetera . 
i can provide the balance of this in the record . 
3 , 018 copies to members , house 1 , 479 copie s , senate 1 , 539 copies ; 153 copies to the library of congress ; 754 copies to public agencies and institutions designated by senators ; 698 copies to federal agencies that pay for the copies ; 521 copies to subsribers who pa y for the copies ; 692 copies to federal depository libraries nationwide . 
i would say to the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 , that it is my feeling that an amendment like this where people are kind of reacting to the & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; congressional record , et cetera , will likely pass overwhelmingly . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise to claim the time in opposition to the amendment , and i ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 control 2 1/2 minutes of that time . 
in addition to the $ 2 , 345 , 000 provided in this bill for general expenses , the capitol police have $ 32 , 653 , 000 in unobligated balances , for a total of almost $ 62 million . 
this $ 2 million amendment is interesting , but the police , in this instance , do not need an additional $ 2 million , and because of that , i strongly oppose the amendment . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i urge a `` no '' vote , and i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , during the markup of this bill , we pared down the total requests considerably from roughly $ 3 billion to $ 2.8 billion , a 9 percent reduction from the requested amount . 
it provides for cost-of-living increases , some inflationary items , and a minimal number of projects to keep our buildings and grounds in reasonably good order . 
a further reduction of 1 percent will adversely impact the operation of the legislative branch during the fiscal year ahead . 
the reduction will severely impair the ability of the house and legislative branch agencies to provide the full cost-of-living increases for all of our employees . 
it is nice to say we will cut 1 percent across the board , but frankly , that is really not the way to legislate , and because of that , i strongly oppose the gentleman 's amendment . 
mr. chairman , i yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 , my colleague . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , by way of suggesting that the leadership on both sides of the aisle made the decision about building our visitors center and that process has gone forward , and many a fit and start , but nonetheless it is going to be the largest expansion of the capitol in modern time . 
the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 and i have been on the other side of that issue in the past ; but , nonetheless , like the visitors center , the speaker has suggested we include the continuity of government item in this package . 
that too is at a pay grade that is above mine , and i feel very strongly we should have some mechanism to make certain that in times of a real tragedy the house can get its work done . 
but in the end , we do need to have special elections in the case of a catastrophe . 
the problem is it misses the point of what happens in the 45 days or , if the gentlewoman from california ( ms. millender-mcdonald ) xz4002750 passes , in the 75 days . 
i read with some alarm the `` roll call '' article of december 6 , 2004 , on this subject , and i will quote from that article : `` the country is going to be under martial law until we have elections anyway. '' that was actually said by the gentleman from ohio ( mr. chabot ) xz4000710 , chairman of the constitution subcommittee . 
because that appears to be the case , and absent a constitutional amendment to allow for a temporary appointment , we will have martial law and the elimination of a republic in this country . 
mr. chairman , the legislation that we are going to be considering today deals with a very , very serious issue , the possibility actually of a tragic attack that would result in the death of a significant number of our colleagues in the house . 
though i think it is safe to say that none of us are eager to consider this issue , the events of september 11 , 2001 , forced this house to consider the ramifications of a successful terrorist attack against this body . 
on that fateful day , the enemies of freedom clearly targeted the pillars of our nation . 
and , by all accounts , flight 93 was targeted either at the white house or at this building , both symbols of our form of democratic government and of our freedoms . 
in fact , only the heroic actions , the unbelievable bravery of those brave passengers on flight 93 prevented that particular plane , that particular flight , from reaching its intended target . 
h.r. 841 , the continuity in representation act , provides a very reasonable , very well thought-out mechanism for the reconstitution of the house of representatives in the event of such a tragedy . 
the sponsor of the bill , the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. sensenbrenner ) xz4003650 , as well as the gentleman from california ( mr. dreier ) xz4001150 and the gentleman from ohio ( mr. ney ) xz4002930 are to be commended for their great commitment and dedication in crafting this bill and bringing it to the floor today . 
mr. chairman , all the other branches of government already have contingency plans in place . 
in the case of a vacancy , the president would be replaced quickly by the existing line of succession . 
only the house would be unable to function quickly in a time of national emergency . 
the continuity in representation act would correct this problem by requiring states to hold special elections to fill vacancies in the house of representatives not later than 49 days after the vacancy is announced by the speaker of this house in the extraordinary circumstances that vacancies in representation from the states exceed 100 . 
mr. chairman , as we grapple with this issue , we must remind ourselves that the u.s. house of representatives is the people 's house . 
for the entirety of our national existence , members of the house have been directly elected by the people . 
article 1 , section 2 of our constitution states : `` when vacancies happen in the representation from any state , the executive authority thereof shall issue writs of elections to fill such vacancies. '' the key word here is `` elections. '' no event should be reason enough to change this historic and constitutional constant . 
there have been a number of suggested alternatives to the proposal in this legislation . 
some have called for perhaps temporary appointment of the members of congress in such an emergency either through gubernatorial appointment like that in the senate , or even by a sitting member naming a successor to take the seat in the event of that member 's death . 
any of these ideas would require a constitutional amendment , which would be a change from both tradition and constitutional mandate which expressly calls again for the direct election of members of the house of representatives . 
concerns have also been expressed regarding the requirement that special elections be completed within 49 days of the speaker 's announcement of 100 existing vacancies in the house would be difficult . 
mr. chairman , before i came to congress actually , i was honored to serve as michigan 's secretary of state for 8 years with a principal responsibility of serving as that state 's chief election official , so this is an area that i do have some expertise in . 
under this legislation , states would have the option , let me repeat , the option , of eliminating the primary election and permitting political parties recognized by state law to choose their candidates . 
furthermore , mr. chairman , the passage of the help america vote act of 2002 , hava as we commonly call it , has helped to prepare local election officials more than ever to conduct special elections . 
states have either constructed or are moving very quickly toward construction of statewide computerized voter registration files , similar to the one that we built in michigan several years ago . 
technology actually allows for these lists to be updated daily so that a clean , up-to-date file can be printed out literally any day of the year anytime , and provided to the polling sites . 
also , states are now moving toward uniformity of voting systems in their precincts . 
uniformity of election equipment in a state will enable vendors to always have a camera ready template of the ballot , and then all they literally have to do is fill in the names of the nominees for u.s. representative and go to print . 
h.r. 841 also protects the ability of military personnel and overseas citizens to participate in a special election by requiring that absentee ballots be transmitted to such voters within 15 days of the speaker 's announcement and that such absentee ballots be counted if they are received not later than 45 days after the state transmits them . 
in fact , even now the department of defense , the dod , is moving towards a program where service men and women stationed overseas can actually download their ballots via the internet . 
there is no question there is lots of hard work . 
i have no doubts that they would do so in a time of national emergency . 
clearly it is incumbent on us to find a solution to this issue which honors the wishes and the wisdom of the founding fathers that the house of representatives remain the people 's house . 
mr. chairman , it has been said that the price of freedom is remaining ever vigilant . 
i believe passing h.r. 841 is a step in showing the enemies of freedom that america is remaining ever vigilant . 
similar legislation received over 300 votes in the last congress , and i would , again , ask my colleagues for their strong bipartisan support of this legislation . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
it restricts the franchise and inhibits public participation in the expedited special elections it would create , an especially unfortunate development following so closely after the serious problems revealed in the aftermath of the 2004 elections . 
this bill is part of a series of actions by the majority over the last 2 years as advertised in addressing problems of congressional continuity . 
the stated objective of the legislation is to override state laws in order to hold expedited special elections within 45 days of a catastrophe which may leave more than 100 vacancies in the chamber . 
this legislation dumps the problem onto the states to produce something called an `` election '' within 45 days , but without the political and democratic substance we associate with campaigns for the house of representatives . 
it is simply inadequate to the task of reconstituting the house in a truly democratic fashion . 
members on our side of the aisle were split almost down the middle last april in the vote on this legislation because they felt pressured to do something . 
h.r. 841 contains a wish list of provisions which would set impractical deadlines , ignore the rights of candidates to run and of voters to participate in elections , and create confusion in the aftermath of a national catastrophe when the country needs the stability of established constitutional processes and the legitimacy of the rule of law . 
let us look at some of the specifics of this bill . 
among the principal flaws of this legislation are the time frame is much too short for the conducting of special elections in many states . 
even states whose present laws contemplate 45 days may not cope in the aftermath of an unknown future crisis which could affect our infrastructure and communications systems nationwide . 
while states could conduct special elections to fill vacancies even without this bill , it eliminates their flexibility in the scheduling of elections , in the format of the elections and in the costs of elections . 
new voters would be blocked out of the system . 
the bill provides no mechanism for candidates to qualify for the ballot in states which require petition gathering or other potentially time-consuming measures intended to assess the public support and credibility of potential candidates . 
states are expected to develop some faster method to accomplish these central goals of qualifying candidates to run very early before the bill 's trigger is pulled or risk missing the deadline . 
this bill assumes that there are instant candidates out there who , upon learning of a vacancy , will decide to run without full consultation with family and friends , or with their potential parties and relevant interest groups and who can instantly arrange financing and instantly have an infrastructure in place to negotiate the campaign finance laws . 
are candidates who can make instant decisions to run and instantly finance their campaigns representative of the full range of political talent of america ? 
h.r. 841 deals with a practical catastrophe and a partial one , but becomes useless in the event of a total catastrophe . 
is it not the responsibility of congress to anticipate and find solutions to problems when it enacts laws and not to rely on some vague national town meeting if the bill fails to work ? 
the 45-day provision in the bill allows insufficient time to assemble the infrastructure of elections necessary to manage elections competently and fairly . 
even in elections , under the best of circumstances , there are inevitably problems with voter registration lists , voting with provisional ballots , transmitting , receiving , and counting absentee ballots , reserving polling places and staffing the polls with voting machines and election workers . 
mr. chairman , this bill represents the wrong choices of values in a democracy . 
it creates an artificial election timetable aimed at simply creating a result , and that is just members of the house . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i have no further requests for time , and i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , the continuity in representation act provides a process to ensure that our democratic government remains stable and orderly during a possible time of great instability . 
in addition , it preserves the unique status of the house of representatives by continuing the tradition and the constitutional mandate that every member of this body must be elected by his or her constituents . 
in such a time of crisis , the people of this nation must have a voice in the critical decisions that are being made . 
the time limit of 49 days that this bill lays out is more than adequate , mr. chairman . 
in fact , a survey of election officials confirmed that this is a realistic time frame , and i will tell you as a former elections official myself , i concur with those findings . 
furthermore , several states already have laws in place that require special elections to be conducted in a shorter period of time than the 49-day limit that this legislation requires . 
it is a short enough period that the house is reconstituted quickly and loses none of its authority , and , at the same time , it is a long enough period for fair elections to be conducted . 
in fact , h.r. 841 that we consider today has improved on the previous bill by addressing the following reservations that some members of the house and some of the states had regarding that bill . 
certainly as an advocate of states ' rights , this provision was extremely important to both myself and many of us here in this chamber . 
finally , the time limit for special elections to be completed has been extended to 49 days from the time of the speaker 's announcement that over 100 vacancies exist . 
mr. speaker , this is not simply a bill about elections or the best way to replace members of congress . 
mr. chairman , this bill is about the strength of our nation . 
it is about our ability to secure the homeland , and it does that by ensuring that our democratically elected government is able to respond in the face of an urgent threat . 
this is an issue that affects every single american , mr. chairman ; and the congress should act in the interest of america and of democracy . 
i urge all of my colleagues to join me in supporting h.r. 841 , and i look forward very much to supporting and passing this important and historic legislation . 
i yield back the balance of my time , mr. chairman . 
while this amendment would only increase the time limit in which to conduct the special election by 11 days , more than the limit provided for in h.r. 841 , it would weaken the power of congress in a significant way . 
according to the war powers act , when the president has put our armed forces into action , congress must act within 60 days to either approve or to disapprove the use of those troops . 
following an attack in which over 100 members of congress have been killed , it is quite likely that a military response would be required . 
if congress is not reconstituted within this 60-day period , it would lose its ability to either affirm or disapprove of the executive 's use of military actions and , thus , the power of the legislative branch would be diminished . 
a survey of election officials , as i mentioned earlier , shows that 49 days is a reasonable period of time in which to conduct a special election . 
and as a former chief elections officer of the state of michigan , i agree with that assessment . 
as the legislation currently stands , states would have the option , and let me reiterate again , the states have the option of eliminating the primary election and permitting political parties recognized by state law to choose those candidates . 
furthermore , mr. chairman , the passage of the help america vote act of 2002 , hava , as it is commonly called , has helped prepare election officials more than ever to conduct such a special election . 
states have either constructed or are moving towards construction of statewide , computerized voter registration files , similar , as i mentioned , to the one we built in michigan several years ago . 
technology is allowing these lists to be updated literally daily , so that a clean up-to-date file can be printed out any date of the year and provided to every polling site . 
also , states are rapidly moving towards a uniform system of voting machines . 
uniformity of election equipment in a state will enable vendors to always have a camera-ready template on the ballot , and then all they have to do is just fill in the name of the nominees for u.s. representative and go to print . 
finally , mr. chairman , some states already prescribe that special elections be conducted in a period of time even shorter than this . 
all of this goes to prove that the amendment is completely unnecessary . 
the only thing that this amendment would effectively do is extend the time period for which some parts of the nation would not be represented in this body , in the united states house of representatives . 
while it is true that state and local officials must have sufficient time to conduct elections , it is imperative that they be completed as quickly as possible so that there is some semblance of continuity in representation . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from rhode island ( mr. langevin ) xz4002300 , a former secretary of state . 
mr. chairman , i yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. sensenbrenner ) xz4003650 , the distinguished chairman of the committee on the judiciary , who has been a driving force in bringing this legislation to the floor today . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
as i have listened to the debate , i feel more strongly than ever that this amendment would severely weaken the impact of h.r. 841 . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
in this book we have , the first `` report of the continuity of government commission , '' in that it outlined an election in michigan , michigan 's third congressional district where the vacancy occurred in 1993 , and the time that was allotted for that election was 178 days , which brought us the distinguished gentleman from michigan ( mr. ehlers ) xz4001190 who is part of our committee . 
mr. chairman , in returning to the testimony of mr. doug lewis , executive director of election center , after polling election officials from around the country , he summarized the results : `` while the responses indicated a variety of dates ranging from the shortest time period of 35 days after determination of who the candidates will be to a period of 4 months , it appears that election administrators feel that they can conduct an election with as few as 45 days . 
however , the election officials would be far more confident that the interest of democracy would be best served by having up to 60 days to get the elections organized and held . 
each additional day beyond the 45 day minimum time frame creates greater confidence in the process. '' mr. chairman , i prefer to come down on the side of the interest of democracy , and my instincts after campaigns for local , state , and federal office tell me 49 days is simply too short . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
a number of other bills have been introduced by members on both sides of the aisle proposing amendments to the hava bill . 
the committee on house administration has scheduled hearings on these issues , including in the state of ohio i would say , and we will be considering all of these bills in due course . 
we are here to provide for continuity and representation of this house and the american people . 
mr. speaker , i yield 1 minute to the gentleman from illinois ( mr. hastert ) xz4001690 , the speaker of the house . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i thank the ranking member of the committee on appropriations for yielding me this time , but most particularly for his leadership . 
some of them were consistent with the comments of the gentleman from illinois ( mr. lahood ) xz4002280 that there are a lot of good things about this institution and the facilities that we fund . 
but the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 pointed out some of the concerns that many of us share over the capitol visitors center . 
i share those concerns as well , having been the ranking member of the legislative branch subcommittee before it was incorporated in the full committee . 
it is all federal money now , of course . 
obviously , we are way behind schedule ; but that happens in a lot of construction projects . 
we recognize this is going to be completed , and there will be a number of things that we will be proud to show . 
but some of these situations are going to cause more problems than they are worth . 
one would think that would be a good thing , but what is going to wind up happening , they are going to be given a virtual tour of the capitol . 
now , do you want to be the member who tells your constituents , after traveling from any place in the united states , and for many of them it takes a whole day to get here , they stay here , they are all excited and they get to the capitol visitors center and want to go to the capitol and you have to tell them well , actually , there is no room ? 
half of the people coming into the capitol visitors center are probably going to have to be informed there is no room in the actual capitol for you to be able to make a visit today . 
a lot of the decisions have really not been made by the members as much as staff , i have to say . 
it is not the staff of the appropriations subcommittee that has made those decisions , but we have got some major concerns . 
i want to raise one now , though , that is not a matter of legislation , but it is one that has been brought to my attention as cochair of the congressional prevention coalition . 
one of them is in regard to smoking . 
with that , i would like to enter into a colloquy with the chairman of the full committee on this because i do think we need to address it . 
because that main designated area is the only place available on that floor for smoking , it gets pretty asphyxiating according to many of the staff who have contacted me . 
i think we need to address it because some of these people have real serious health problems in terms of their breathing capabilities ; some have asthma and other related problems . 
they just can not deal with all of that smoke and they do not have any choice to avoid it given the situation that frequently occurs . 
i yield to the chairman of the full committee to see if he has some suggestions in how we could alleviate this problem for the nonsmokers . 
i thank the chairman and i thank the interest of ms. johnson , the lead staff for the committee on legislative branch issues . 
mr. chairman , this is a trojan horse of a new and growing financial obligation that we really need to deal with now and to accept the committee 's recommendation that it be consolidated with the u.s. park police mounted unit . 
in may of 2004 we began with six horses . 
but , the salaries and the benefits of the capitol police officers that are involved in this come to approximately $ 600 , 000 . 
so it is not $ 145 , 000 , it is three-quarters of a million dollars . 
these police officers have to travel for at least an hour mile down the whole distance of route 1 to pick them up , another hour back . 
and the little spot , what is left now is about the size of somebody 's backyard , and i guess it makes it easier for the pooper scooper , but the problem is that we are paying a substantial amount of money , about three-quarters of a million dollars for very limited benefit . 
i just can not imagine why the capitol police need a mounted police unit , particularly given all of our other priorities . 
we have worked hard to reduce the number of copies . 
we have eliminated the bound copies of the & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; congressional record . 
i do not know if people have noticed , but we eliminated that which used to be a tradition , and since 1995 we have reduced the number of copies from 18 , 000 per day to 6 , 000 . 
the largest cost of the record is preparing the data for printing and on-line dissemination , and that cost is going to be occurred regardless . 
mr. chairman , as the ranking member of the joint committee on printing , i oppose the amendment offered by my friends from arizona ( mr. flake ) and oregon ( mr. blumenauer ) . 
according to the gpo , the congressional printing and binding appropriation supports the distribution of 3 , 994 copies of the congressional record , of which 2 , 293 copies , or more than 57 percent , go to the senate . 
if there are too many copies of the record being charged to the congress , the problem lies in the other chamber . 
not long ago , there were 18 , 000 copies of the record produced each day . 
the law provides for members to receive three copies , and members who do n't need three copies can reduce printing costs by informing the clerk of that fact . 
but the printed record remains an important resource for many members of both houses , and i do n't believe the proper approach to this question is to reduce funds for the record by 83 percent , as this amendment would do . 
speaking for the minority side of the joint committee on printing , i am certainly willing to examine this question further . 
she is a former secretary of state . 
she brings a wealth of knowledge and personal experience regarding running elections to this debate . 
and of course house administration does a wide variety of things , but we also oversee federal election laws , so we appreciate her carrying this bill through , and also her perspectives on it . 
mr. chairman , h.r. 841 , the continuity in representation act of 2005 is an important piece of legislation that furthers the vital objective of ensuring that the people 's house would continue to function effectively and with legitimacy in the event of a catastrophic terrorist attack in which a large number of house members would be killed . 
the addition of the extra days would provide additional time for state and local election officials to prepare for expedited special elections and for the voting public to make informed choices . 
this amendment also addresses the concerns of those who felt that too little time was provided for conducting expedited special elections . 
last congress , doug lewis , executive director of the election center , a nonprofit organization representing state and local election officials whose purpose is to promote , preserve and improve democracy , testified before our committee that it appears that elections administrators feel they can conduct an election within as few as 45 days . 
when operating under a tight time frame , any additional time can make a difference in the quality of the process . 
it is a good important piece of legislation . 
and it preserves the fundamental character of the house as a body consisting of only elected members and allows for reconstitution of that body as quickly as possible if we ever face these terrible circumstances which we hope do not happen . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , at a time when nearly all federal agencies are facing the need for spending discipline , it is imperative that we apply restraint to ourselves as well -- to the operations of congress itself . 
i rise in support of this bill , which complies with the budget resolution for fiscal year 2006 . 
most of the funding in this bill goes to non-political agencies , and non-elected people , who make it possible to do our work : the people who provide vital data and analysis to inform our policy decisions ; who keep our buildings and grounds functioning ; and -- of special importance -- providing security for all of the legislative branch . 
this funding covers various legislative support agencies such as the architect of the capitol , library of congress , congressional research service , congressional budget office and the government accountability office , and the capitol police . 
the funding level represents an increase of $ 42 million in ba and $ 241 million in outlays over last year , a 1.7 percent increase from fy 2005 levels . 
consistent with a long-standing practice -- under which each chamber of congress determines its own housekeeping requirements , and the other concurs without change , appropriations for the senate are not included in the bill reported to the house . 
this measure , in providing $ 2.865 billion in budget authority for the operations of the legislative branch excluding senate functions , is well below the overall suballocation of $ 3.719 billion . 
however a level was set within this $ 3.719 billion for legislative operations excluding senate functions of $ 2.831 billion . 
hence , though this measure complies with the relevant points of order under the budget act , it breaches the level internally set by the appropriations committee . 
it is expected that , when this measure is reported from conference committee , the overall level of spending for all legislative operations , including house , senate and support agencies , will be at or below the level set pursuant to 302 ( b ) of the congressional budget act . 
the bill contains a small recession in ba for the library of congress for the copyright reengineering project and no advance appropriations or emergency-designated spending . 
the bill provides $ 311 million to the architect of the capitol ( aoc ) for various operational and maintenance activities under the jurisdiction of the aoc , including , $ 37 million to complete construction of the capitol visitor center . 
this bill also recommends the establishment of a capitol visitors center governing board to address the issue of daily operations of the visitor center . 
$ 543 million to the library of congress , a decrease of $ 2 million from fy 2005 , $ 122 million to the government printing office , an increase of $ 3 million from fy 2005 and $ 482 million for government accountability office , an increase of $ 15 million over fy 2005 . 
finally , the bill provides $ 1.092 billion for operations of the house of representatives and a modest increase of $ 13 million or 1.2 percent , compared with 2005 . 
i commend the committee on appropriations for bringing us a bill that funds the operations of this house at levels generally consistent with the levels authorized under the fiscal year 2006 budget resolution . 
h.r. 841 provides a practical and constitutional way to ensure that the house of representatives can continue to operate in the event that more than 100 members are killed , h.r. 841 thus protects the people 's right to choose their representatives at the time when such a right may be most important , while ensuring continuity of the legislative branch . 
article i section 2 of the united states constitution grants state governors the authority to hold special elections to fill vacancies in the house of representatives . 
article i , section 4 of the constitution gives congress the authority to designate the time , place and manner of such special elections if states should fail to act expeditiously following a national emergency . 
alexander hamilton , who played a major role in the drafting and ratification of the united states constitution , characterized authority over federal elections as shared between the states and congress , with neither being able to control the process entirety . 
h.r. 841 exercises congress 's power to regulate the time , place and manner of elections by requiring the holding of special elections within 45 days after the speaker or acting speaker declares 100 members of the house have been killed . 
i have no doubt that the people of the states are quite competent to hold elections in a timely fashion . 
the version of h.r. 841 before congress today was drafted with input from state elections commissioners to make sure it sets realistic goals and will not unduly burden state governments . 
i am disappointed that some of my colleagues reject the sensible approach of h.r. 841 and instead support amending the constitution to allow appointed members to serve in this body . 
allowing appointed members to serve in `` the people 's house '' will fundamentally alter the nature of this institution and sever the people 's most direct connection with their government . 
even with the direct election of senators , the fact that members of the house are elected every 2 years while senators run for statewide office every 6 years means that members of the house of representatives are still more accountable to the people than members of any other part of the federal government . 
appointed members of congress simply can not be truly representative . 
james madison and alexander hamilton eloquently made this point in federalist 52 : as it is essential to liberty that the government in general should have a common interest with the people , so it is particularly essential that the branch of it under consideration should have an immediate dependence on , and an intimate sympathy with , the people . 
mr. chairman , there are those who say that the power of appointment is necessary in order to preserve checks and balances and thus prevent an abuse of executive power during a time of crisis . 
of course , i agree that it is very important to carefully guard our constitutional liberties in times of crisis and that an over-centralization of power in the executive branch is one of the most serious dangers to that liberty . 
however , mr. chairman , during a time of crisis it is all the more important to have representatives accountable to the people . 
otherwise , the citizenry has no check on the inevitable tendency of government to infringe on the people 's liberties at such a time . 
i would remind my colleagues that the only reason we are considering reexamining provisions of the patriot act is because of public concerns that this act gives up excessive liberty for a phantom security . 
supporters of amending the constitution claim that the appointment power will be necessary in the event of an emergency and that the appointed representatives will only be temporary . 
mr. chairman , this country has faced the possibility of threats to the continuity of this body several times in our history . 
yet no one suggested removing the people 's right to vote for members of congress . 
for example , the british in the war of 1812 attacked the city of washington , yet nobody suggested the states could not address the lack of a quorum in the house of representatives through elections . 
during the civil war , the neighboring state of virginia , where today many capitol hill staffers reside and many members stay while congress is in session , was actively involved in hostilities against the united states government . 
adopting any of the proposals to deny the people the ability to choose their own representatives as noted above , the framers gave congress all the tools it needs to address problems of mass vacancies in the house without compromising this institution 's primary function as a representative body . 
in fact , as hamilton explains in federalist 59 , the `` time , place , and manner '' clause was specifically designed to address the kind of extraordinary circumstances imagined by those who support amending the constitution . 
in conclusion , i urge my colleagues to support h.r. 841 , the continuity in representation act , which ensures an elected congress can continue to operate in the event of an emergency . 
this is what the drafters of the constitution intended . 
furthermore , passage of h.r. 841 sends a strong message to terrorists that they can not alter our republican government . 
we are coming down the home stretch , and we should all be proud of that . 
when we get that kind of an increase , the architect asks us for more money and we provide it . 
if natural gas prices continue as they are , next year we will be looking at a 3 to $ 4 million increase to heat our capitol complex for the same amount of heat . 
but when our folks back home heating their homes , running their businesses have these kind of natural gas increases , i think it is time for congress to act . 
forty to 55 percent of their costs are natural gas . 
by that time , we will have lost some of the industries that i have talked about , and we will have seniors leaving their homes because they can not afford to heat them . 
i am challenging this congress to deal with the natural gas issue , the clean fuel , the fuel that does not have pollutants , the fuel we have an unlimited supply of for the next 50 to 100 years ; and i am challenging this congress to deal with natural gas . 
mr. chairman , i rise in opposition to h.r. 841 , and i regret the partisan flavor that seems to have become part of this debate . 
this bill focuses on the continuity of the election process rather than the continuity of congress . 
the people who wrote this bill got their priorities all mixed up as to what the purpose of this was supposed to be . 
mr. chairman , the time frame in this bill of 45 days is both too long and too short . 
forty-five days is too long to reconstruct the house of representatives in a time of crisis when decisions need to be made immediately , so in that 45 days , when we are the most vulnerable , this legislation would leave america the most vulnerable . 
the gentleman from washington ( mr. baird ) xz4000110 and i have introduced a bipartisan constitutional amendment that solves the problems that h.r. 841 attempts to address , and it does this without the inevitable limitations of trying to fix a constitutional problem with a simple statute . 
house joint resolution 26 provides for the immediate replacement of both deceased and incapacitated members by alternates , who become acting representatives only until a new representative is elected . 
just as the vice president of the united states is elected as part of a ticket with the president , alternate representatives would go on the ballot and be elected as a ticket with their representative so that in times of crisis , there would be immediate representation for the united states congress and for the people throughout our country . 
it provides for both the continuity of congress and for the continuity of representation for every district in the country , even if only one representative dies or is in incapacitated . 
h.r. 841 , on the other hand , does nothing to address incapacity , and in the case of death , allows as many as 99 districts at a time to go without representation for months . 
thus the rohrabacher-baird amendment not only solves all the continuity problems , but also preserves the principle that only elected officials may cast a vote in the house of representatives . 
i ask my colleagues for their support and co-sponsorship of h. j. res. 26 . 
many otherwise competent leaders were in a state of shock and at one moment when we gathered on the capitol steps to send a message to the american people , representative baird and i realized more was needed and began singing god bless america . 
today let 's do what is needed for the american people at a time of maximum crisis . 
this is too important an issue to think about in terms of party politics . 
this is a time of crisis , when american people will be counting on us to do our best and to set up something that will work in a time of crisis . 
i oppose this amendment because it does not correct the fundamental flaw of h.r. 841 , which is leaving the united states of america at a time of its worst crisis , its worst potential crisis that you can imagine , it leaves the american people in the lurch , leaves them without representative government and without representation in the congress for 7 weeks . 
many otherwise competent leaders were in a state of shock and at that moment , on 9/11 , did not necessarily know or were incapable of doing exactly what the right thing was . 
many of us gathered at the capitol on that fateful day ; we gathered on the steps to back up our leadership . 
and let me note that on that day , that time of crisis when we were all in confusion , standing on the capitol about ready to break up , representative barrett and i looked at each other in our eyes and said this is not enough . 
let me note that that was the message the american people needed to hear of unity and god bless america at this time . 
let us today do what is needed for the american people at the time of the next crisis . 
what is happening is we are being offered an alternative that will leave them in the lurch , leave them wanting at the time of maximum crisis . 
if we do believe in god bless america , let us join in now with the partisan flavor of this debate and do what is right to make sure our people are prepared if our country is ever attacked like this again . 
mr. chairman , i yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from washington ( mr. baird ) xz4000110 . 
this solution that we are being offered will not work and will leave the american people vulnerable at a time of maximum crisis . 
this is one of the most important votes that we are going to have . 
for 45 days after the death or incapacitation of these members , we will have no government . 
the people who have written this bill basically have come up with a continuity of elections instead of a continuity of congress , and they have good motives , but the fact is it will not work . 
it will create a huge crisis for america at the moment that it needs to have something laid down for them , something solid on which to rely upon at a time of crisis . 
so , again , let us not leave a void , which this bill does , for the future americans who will face the crisis of a generation and leave them in the lurch . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of this legislation and commend my chairman for the good job that he has done , but i am opposed to one portion of the bill . 
it will not work because it was intended to ensure not the continuity of congress but , as it turned out , it was intended and it is intended by what you can see and what it does to ensure the continuity of the election process , which are two different items . 
the task force that got together to try to come up with a solution to this challenge of what we are going to do in case of a catastrophe where many of our people are killed or incapacitated became confused about what they were supposed to be doing . 
the idea is not to ensure the election process , but to ensure that this congress can act in a time of emergency . 
instead , what we have gotten as our alternative , which is in title iii of this bill , will put us in grave jeopardy for 7 weeks after a national catastrophe . 
i am pleading with my republican friends to please open their eyes and not let the ego of the people on this task force who put together this and now will not look at any other alternative get in the way of watching out for the people of the united states . 
if al qaeda or any other enemy of our country manages to create a situation or explode a bomb or murder or incapacitate large numbers of our people , we can not wait for 7 weeks of a special election in order to deal with that . 
what we have been offered is a plan that will lead to martial law at exactly the time when we need congress functioning to represent the interests of the american people . 
the alternative to what we have been offered by this task force which , as i say , lost their way on this is that we should change the way we do things so that we can cope with the challenge of this type of threat to our society , that is , we will run , we will select an alternate to run with us , the voters will vote for a team of people so that if we are incapacitated or murdered , the alternate can take that seat right away and congress will not cease to function for 7 weeks . 
that person is elected , just like the vice president of the united states is elected and will take over for the president of the united states . 
we have to get rid of these cliches . 
we have got to get rid of these blocks on thinking what will happen . 
put ourselves in a position of what will happen in a catastrophe . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of h.r. 841 , the continuity of representation act of 2005 . 
had it not been for the heroic actions of the passengers of united flight 93 who forced the plane down over pennsylvania , congress 's ability to serve the american people may have been severely disrupted . 
during the last congress , the house acted in an overwhelmingly bipartisan fashion to address this deficiency by passing the predecessor of this year 's bill by a larger than three to one margin . 
unfortunately , the bill was never brought up in the other body because of the objections of one or more anonymous members of that chamber . 
consequently , the guarantee of the right to elected representation following a catastrophic incident has yet been unnecessarily imperiled . 
the legislation before us again today will preserve the people 's constitutional right to directly elected representation by providing for the expedited special election of new members within 49 days of the speaker 's announcement that there are more than 100 house vacancies . 
the house , unique among all branches and bodies of the entire federal government , is rooted in the principle of direct elections , and that principle must be preserved . 
current federal law allows the presidency and the senate to consist of entirely the unelected in certain circumstances . 
congress has the clear authority to enact the continuity in representation act under article i , section 4 of the constitution , which allows congress , at any time by law , to make or alter state election laws . 
as alexander hamilton wrote , the constitution gives the congress members from both parties have a significant stake in the operation of the house following a terrorist incident , and i am pleased that the legislation before us today is appropriately a product of bipartisan cooperation and input . 
for example , i worked with the gentleman from missouri ( mr. skelton ) xz4003770 , ranking member of the committee on armed services , to craft provisions that govern absentee ballots cast by members of the armed forces , and overseas voters , whose ballots would be counted if they are received within 45 days after the state transmits them . 
further , i have worked with the gentleman from michigan ( mr. conyers ) xz4000800 , ranking member of the committee on the judiciary , to add a provision that all federal laws governing the administration of elections for federal office are explicitly preserved . 
during the committee on house administration 's markup of the bill , a substitute amendment offered by the gentleman from ohio ( chairman ney ) was adopted , which includes further changes that directly respond to concerns expressed by the minority . 
first , the current bill continues to allow states the option of having special election candidates selected by parties within 10 days , but would also authorize the states to select such candidates by any other method including primaries provided such method will ensure the state will hold the special election within the 45-day period . 
while some take the pessimistic view of the resiliency of the electoral process following an attack on the nation 's capital , i have a different view . 
i have no doubt that the boundless spirit of the american people will ensure that democracy prevails even in the most pressing conditions . 
what i have heard from the opponents of this bill is that they say , well , we can not have an election put together so quickly . 
the gentlewoman from michigan ( mrs. miller ) xz4002761 , i think , has made it quite clear that from her experience as michigan 's secretary of state and chief election officer that we will be able to do that . 
and i point out that what this bill does is to ensure the prompt filling of vacant seats in states that have long special election processes . 
if virginia makes that apply to vacancies in the house of representatives , we are going to have a full virginia delegation sitting in this chamber or elsewhere legislating while the states that decide that they want to have more debates and keep the seats vacant will end up sitting unrepresented here . 
the one seat in the house of representatives that is vacant today is that occupied by our beloved colleague , the late bob matsui . 
but if no candidate in that election gets more than 50 percent of the vote , then we will wait until may 3 to find out who the new representative from sacramento , california is . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
to respond to the gentleman 's comments about california , it does show that we do need beyond 45 days to hold a special election , such as in the case of our late friend , representative bob matsui . 
so those are the number of days that are important that we need to adhere to . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , the primary opposition to this legislation comes from people who have favored a constitutional amendment to provide for the appointment of substitute representatives should there be a catastrophe that wipes out a significant part or all of the house of representatives . 
i believe last year , the house of representatives laid that proposition to rest . 
we did have a full debate on the floor of the constitutional amendment that both the gentleman from washington ( mr. baird ) xz4000110 and the gentleman from california ( mr. rohrabacher ) xz4003430 supported . 
twenty votes are necessary for the two-thirds majority necessary to propose amendments to the constitution on any subject , and i believe that the house of representatives at that time clearly and emphatically spoke in favor of maintaining elections as the only way one could enter the house of representatives , the people 's house . 
so now we hear that the 49 days that are proposed in this bill are too short to be able to organize a proper election in a time of crisis . 
during the second world war , great britain was under attack constantly by the german air force , and even during the war they were able to hold special elections to fill vacancies in the house of commons within 42 days . 
democracy prevailed because the people of great britain insisted that it do so , and those elections worked and those people who were elected entered the house of commons with a mandate from the people . 
this bill will work just as well in a time of crisis as a way of repopulating the house . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
new voters will be blocked out of the system entirely . 
is this what we want , given the last election of 2004 ? 
this bill simply represents the wrong choices of values in a democracy . 
secondly , the purpose of this bill is to require special elections to be held in those states with slower special election processes , to be held as quickly as possible within the 49-day period . 
the gentlewoman from california has read parts of the letter that mr. kennedy , who is the executive director of the wisconsin elections board has written . 
and that is not fair to the people of my state , and it is not fair to the people of the other states , including the gentlewoman from california 's own state that have relatively slow special election procedures . 
and should this bill go down and the slow states continue to be really slow , then their delegations will either be nonexistent or have a relatively few number of members . 
well , to speed up the process of repopulating the house , quicker than when special elections can be held , will require a constitutional amendment . 
we did debate a constitutional amendment and it was defeated by a vote of 63 ayes to 350-plus noes . 
sixty days or a longer period of time simply will not cut it . 
when there is a catastrophe that wipes out a significant number of members of the house , it is in the interest of the public to fill those vacancies as quickly as possible through a fair election . 
let us not allow endless litigation at a time of national catastrophe . 
they will result in new representatives coming with mandates rather than having the frustration of lawsuits that go on interminably . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , the fatal flaw in this amendment is it does not extend the 49 days under which the election is required to be held under the provisions of this bill . 
this is a question very simply of lawsuits versus elections . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
the gentleman from washington has been very sincere in stating that there ought to be a constitution amendment to provide for temporary appointments to the house of representatives in case of a tragedy . 
the house debated that amendment in the last congress , and it was rejected by the resounding margin of 63 ayes to 353 noes . 
that should have closed the issue of having appointed members serve , even on a temporary basis . 
earlier this year , the house passed the continuity of representation act . 
in this 49-day time frame , the election center has shown that there can be special elections that will have the vigorous debate that the gentleman from washington ( mr. baird ) xz4000110 wants to have in terms of selecting replacement representatives for those of us who are wiped out . 
but i would say that if the gentleman from washington ( mr. baird ) xz4000110 has his way , we could have a house of 350 appointed members outvoting the 85 elected members that survive the enemy attack . 
we would have an appointed house and perhaps an appointed senate , and an appointed president of the united states . 
we ought to get the continuity of representation act passed through the other body and made law because it is an important and vital homeland security measure . 
as the gentleman knows , i withdrew my proposal in light of ongoing activities relative to the exhibitry in the capitol visitors center . 
mr. chairman , i thank the gentleman , and i appreciate so much his working with me on this and look forward to appropriately recognizing the fact that there have been religious activities in this capitol from the beginning of our nation through the first 70 or 80 years . 
mr. chairman , i offer an amendment as the designee of the gentleman from texas ( mr. mccaul ) xz4006540 . 
one of his predecessors in the 10th district of texas died tragically just a few days ago , congressman pickle , and the gentleman from texas ( mr. mccaul ) xz4006540 did attend his funeral and could not be here today to vote nor could he be here today to offer this amendment . 
as a good conservative and someone who minds the fiscal house of the united states government , the gentleman from texas ( mr. mccaul ) xz4006540 offered this amendment that would simply rein in the cost of printing , just much like the gentleman from arizona ( mr. flake ) xz4001340 offered a few moments ago . 
this would simply take $ 2 million out of the printing budget for our legislative branch and give that $ 2 million to security . 
it would take care of security equipment and weapons for capitol hill police . 
it is not that i am against printing or paper , or it is not that i am against ink either , but certainly i think we should restrain spending where it has gotten out of hand , and our printing budget is clearly out of hand . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
i thank the gentleman for the eloquence and the simplicity of his statement , and as a new member here , i certainly respect my senior member 's opinions on this matter , and i do concur . 
with that , i would certainly appreciate the kindness of the house in voting for this amendment that would somewhat restrain our spending in the matter of printing here in congress . 
i just think we need to fund security rather than paper and printing , and with that , i would urge the adoption of this amendment . 
as the ranking member of the joint committee on printing , i can appreciate the gentleman 's interest in reducing excessive printing and diverting the funds to more useful purposes . 
this is because the congressional printing and binding appropriation is not a traditional appropriation to support a predetermined amount of work by the gpo . 
merely reducing the printing and binding appropriation will not reduce the amount of printing . 
the appropriations committee has recommended the sum of $ 29.3 million for the capitol police 's general expenses . 
as ranking member of the house administration committee , which has jurisdiction over the capitol police , i believe we should accept the appropriations committee 's recommendation . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i would urge that the point of order be rejected on grounds that the language my friend cites explicates and explains a limitation . 
this is a limitation amendment , and the language in the amendment simply establishes the scope of the limitation . 
this language does not , and i would urge rejection of the point of order . 
mr. chairman , i move to appeal the ruling of the chair . 
mr. speaker , by direction of the committee on rules , i call up house resolution 287 and ask for its immediate consideration . 
mr. speaker , for the purpose of debate only , i yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from florida ( mr. hastings ) xz4001701 , pending which i yield myself such time as i may consume . 
during consideration of this resolution , all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only . 
this resolution provides for an open rule on h.r. 2361 , the interior appropriations act for fiscal year 2006 , and provides for 1 hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chairman and ranking member of the committee on appropriations . 
for the purpose of amendments , this rule provides for priority recognition to members who preprinted their amendments in the & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; congressional record , and the rule also allows for certain points of order to be raised in the course of consideration of this bill . 
actually , mr. speaker , it does not , but until you say that magic word the media does not send its attention to the fact that the house is actually continuing on with the input of good government in our processes , so this bill actually , for which i am pleased to stand before the house and support the rule on the underlying legislation , is the interior appropriations act . 
i appreciate the hard work and the hard choices that the subcommittee chairman , the gentleman from north carolina ( mr. taylor ) xz4003992 , the gentleman from california ( chairman lewis ) , the gentleman from washington ( mr. dicks ) xz4001090 , and many others have put into making and putting this essential funding bill together , which does live within the budget discipline , and in fact reflects the priorities of this congress . 
by prioritizing the needs , this provides , for example , an increase in six of the eight epa programs for the environment . 
it provides for a $ 118 million increase for indian health services , a $ 25 million increase over last year 's funding level for restoration of the everglades . 
it includes , for example , a $ 70 million increase for the national parks base funding , but at the same time $ 440 million to help reduce the backlog of national park maintenance . 
it also provides for a record amount of funding to the national fire plan , and gives the department flexibility in these accounts to help prevent and fight the annual onslaught of raging fires on public lands in the west , which have plagued many areas , especially california in recent years . 
i am also pleased in particular that the gentleman from north carolina ( chairman taylor ) has been diligent in funding the vital payment in lieu of tax program , or pilt , which so many western and rural counties depend upon for these vital public services . 
with that , mr. speaker , i urge adoption of the rule . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
it is the wonderful prerogative of the members to do that . 
it is also very nice to note that the committee on appropriations which is tasked with trying to prioritize needs and fund those that are truly significant in that prioritization , and in this particular situation , the gentleman from north carolina ( chairman taylor ) and the gentleman from washington mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
i would like to do something unique so far in today 's debate and talk about something that is actually in the bill , and something about which we will be debating later , and preface it with the comment of why , when we try to prioritize , should we spend new taxpayer money for new recreation areas and programs when some of the existing programs , long-time recognized , long time in the bill , are not totally and fully funded . 
if i could , mr. speaker , i come from a western state that has a great deal of federal land . 
in fact , 67 percent of my state is owned by the federal government . 
if we add military lands on top of that , it is almost 80 percent owned by the federal government . 
there are states that have more of their land owned by the federal government . 
oftentimes i have members come to the floor and say these lands belong to all of us , but the cost of maintaining those lands is not borne by all of us ; it is borne by the citizens who happen to reside within those particular states . 
now i am an old teacher , and as i look at the situation of education , i find a unique phenomenon that the area of this country in which education funding is growing the slowest , the area of this country where the classrooms are the largest , the area of this country where the student population is increasing the fastest , and the area of this country where state and local commitment in tax base is being paid by their citizens all happen to be found in the 13 states of the west . 
and the common denominator for all is the amount of public lands that happen to be in these particular states . 
those members east of the rocky mountains sometimes do not comprehend the concept because there is very little of your land owned by the federal government , and you can maximize the amount of input , but you can not do it in the west . 
one of my counties has an area known as the black box , something that no one in utah would ever try to raft down . 
one of our good constituent friends from another state decided to come and raft in the area of the black box ; and , unfortunately , he lost his life doing it . 
the problem is my county of emery had to expend its resources and have their rescue team risk their lives to retrieve the body . 
all of the money that was budgeted for that year 's critical rescue missions was expended on that one individual entering from the east using all of these public lands . 
all of the cost of that was borne by the citizens of that particular county , which means once again these lands belong to all of us , but the expense attached to these lands do not belong to all of us . 
there is a program that we have long had called `` payment in lieu of taxes , '' which recognizes the burden placed upon the west and the burden that should be funded . 
it was flat funding for almost that whole period of time . 
this congress put $ 1.4 million of new money into the burgeoning problem of trying to pay for the federal lands in the west . 
under the direction of the gentleman from north carolina this last year , this program , traditionally run through the bureau of land management , was taken over by the department of the interior with the idea of prioritizing it . 
instead of prioritizing this program , they recommended a cut in this program and increased funding to the administrative overhead of the department of the interior . 
i commend the gentleman from north carolina ( chairman taylor ) for recognizing the unfairness of this and by increasing the payment in lieu of taxes to last year 's level plus $ 3 million , but it is still not close to full funding . 
we have an opportunity of expanding this in conference . 
this is one of the issues in this free-flowing open rule that we will be discussing later on . 
this is an issue where i commend the chairman for doing what he has done in this bill and urge him to continue on , because the citizens of the west , the kids in the west , the education system of the west have been harmed too long by policies that all of us in congress for over 30 years have been implementing . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
i appreciate the opportunity coming here and discussing this particular open rule that allows for us to discuss the prioritization which is the key element of what we do in every appropriations issue . 
the gentleman from wisconsin is free to come here on the floor and talk about whether he believes the prioritization of this committee is accurate or not , whether he believes the democrat approach would be a tax increase or not . 
what we are saying is it is part of the prioritization . 
i would support acquisition of new land once we finally fully fund and take care of the lands we have . 
this committee put significant new money not just into national parks but to maintain the backlog that we have of maintenance in our national parks . 
in closing , mr. speaker , i have to reiterate the fairness of this open rule and urge its adoption because of that along with the underlying appropriation legislation . 
i am sure we can all come up with issues here and there in the appropriations bill or , for that matter , in any other bill we have where we would like to have it come out differently had we had our way , but in judging this bill as a whole and the process that has been through it to get to the point , i believe it is worthy for members to support this particular piece of legislation . 
the text of the amendment previously referred to by mr. hastings xz4001701 of florida is as follows : previous question on h. res. 287 -- rule for h.r 2361 fy06 interior appropriations at the end of the resolution , add the following new sections : sec . 
2. notwithstanding any other provision of this resolution , the amendment printed in section 3 shall be in order without intervention of any point of order and before any other amendment if ofered by representative obey of wisconsin or a designee . 
the amendment is not subject to amendment except for pro forma amendments or to a demand for a division of the question in the committee of the whole or in the house . 
3. the amendment referred to in section 2 is as follows : amendment to h.r. 2361 , as reported offered by mr. obey xz4003000 of wisconsin at the end of the bill ( before the short title ) , insert the following : sec . 
( a ) the amount otherwise provided in this act for `` environmental protection agency -- state and tribal assistance grants '' ( and the amount specified under such heading for making capitalization grants for the clean water state revolving funds under title vi of the federal water pollution control act ) is hereby increased by $ 500 , 000 , 000 . 
( b ) in the case of taxpayers with adjusted gross income in excess of $ 1 , 000 , 000 for calendar year 2006 , the amount of tax reduction resulting from enactment of the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( pub . 
l. 107-16 ) and the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 ( pub . 
l. 108-27 ) shall be reduced by 1.562 percent. & lt ; p & gt ; mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time , and i move the previous question on the resolution . 
mr. speaker , i object to the vote on the ground that a quorum is not present and make the point of order that a quorum is not present . 
then , invite the american chemistry council as a partner in this study , knowing that in exchange for $ 2 million paid toward the study , it wants looser regulations for the pesticide industry , which in turn wants to use humans instead of animals so it can justify relaxed exposure limits . 
it 's a trifecta of unethical , immoral , and unscientific research . 
it advances private rather than medical interests , putting industry ahead of public health . 
our amendment is supported by a broad coalition of environmental advocates , including the alliance for human research protection in my home state of new york . 
after the budget shortfall was announced , both sides of the aisle in the senate came together to take immediate action to address the issue . 
the republican leadership of the house decided to sit on their hands and wait for president bush to pull out of the air a number . 
however , it turned out that the bush level was $ 300 million short of funding veterans health . 
every year they release their priorities , and every year the va is short of funding to complete its mission . 
as of april in gainesville , florida , there were nearly 700 service-connected veterans waiting for more than 30 days for an appointment . 
let us get past the $ 1.5 billion for veterans health care ; let us just stop all of the talking and put our talk into action . 
mr. chairman , water is one of the most precious resources floridians possess . 
representing several of the state 's largest water reserves , protecting the quality and availability of our water has always been a top priority . 
unfortunately , the epa is proposing this dumping rule that would damage the integrity of america 's water . 
the consequences of this strategy could be very dire . 
certainly in a state like florida where we have more than our share of heavy rains during rainy season , and you can be darn sure we are going to have a lot of hurricanes again , it would be virtually playing russian roulette every time that citizens would be drinking tap water . 
mr. speaker , i rise today in support of the motion to instruct conferees on h.r. 2361 , department of interior , environment and related agencies appropriations act for fiscal year 2006 . 
this bill will provide the department of veterans affairs with supplemental funding of approximately $ 1.5 billion for fiscal year 2005 . 
several weeks ago , the house of representatives unanimously passed h.r. 3130 which provided $ 975 million in health care funding for the fiscal year . 
we did that in response to revelations at the time to a line of questioning that i had with dr . 
perlin of vha at a full committee hearing on health care modeling and forecasting . 
we learned that since the spring of this year va hospitals and clinics were shifting significant amounts of funds into medical services from maintenance and capital equipment accounts . 
this shifting was driven by underestimates of long-term care requirements and increased use of va facilities by returning operations enduring freedom and operation iraqi freedom veterans to also include a surge of veterans in categories 1 through 6 and category 7 for health care . 
i also then immediately informed the speaker of the house and the majority leader of this issue . 
the secretary returned from meetings with his staff on june 30 , bringing to us a number of $ 975 million . 
this house acted the very same day in which the secretary made his request through the president of the united states approving to the penny the va 's request . 
what is really important is the $ 975 million number ; and as a matter of fact , just last week the va said they hold to the number . 
the republican senate leadership offered a number of $ 1.5 billion . 
now the challenge we have is they passed a number on the senate interior appropriations bill of emergency supplemental . 
the house passed a $ 975 million number that was paid for out of the 2005 budget . 
so what we are doing is rolling one on top of another . 
we have $ 975 million which was paid for out of the 2005 budget . 
but when we look at vha 's forecasting performance which has been the focus at some of our animated hearings in the house , 3 over the last several weeks , in april they provide notice to the committee on appropriations that they are going to reprogram $ 600 million . 
then in the latter part of june when we hold our hearing , they testify they are short $ 975 million , but they have `` work-around solutions. '' then a few days later while we are on our july break , we learn that the number was short $ 300 million . 
we either take care of that in 2005 , or we have to include it in the 2006 budget amendment . 
so that is why i am going to support the motion to instruct , because there is a loss of confidence here in the house with regard to the number that has been given to us . 
part of the reason dealt with their modeling and their forecasting . 
so we have informed them that they have every opportunity to get right the 2007 budget because now they tell us about the use of old data and poor measuring criteria . 
mr. speaker , i would say everyone wants the modeling to be correct and for us to reestablish trust and confidence on our predictability of a budget number . 
i think there is lack of trust and confidence under the budget number , and omb has proven they are not as good of a caretaker here as they think they are . 
we will work cooperatively with omb because they also are part of this process of the pain . 
i have asked secretary nicholson to review the leadership of the vha bureaucracy to ensure that the right people are running it , and also its finances and some within the health network . 
in particular , i am greatly disappointed and have lost confidence in the leadership and management of the deputy under secretary for health , for operations and for management . 
we will hold va accountable for its use of these dollars in the performance of its mission . 
one of the harshest realities of combat in iraq and afghanistan is the number of servicemembers returning from iraq and afghanistan with loss of limbs and other severe and lasting injuries . 
with the body armor which we are providing to our soldiers , they can turn that up , and what is happening is it protects the torso , and they are having now loss of limbs and traumatic brain injuries . 
one of them is in minneapolis , one is in palo alto , another one is in richmond , and one is in tampa . 
vsos and others are saying that these individual veterans are not being seen because of cuts in the va . 
in the end , those of us who exercise great care to raise and support the military know that our obligation does not end upon one 's discharge . 
we care for them to make as whole as possible and to create a climate so that one may take advantage of economic opportunities to live beyond a disability paycheck so that the defenders of liberty may also enjoy the bounties of the liberty for which they fight . 
mr. chairman , established in 1907 by president theodore roosevelt , the tongass is our nation 's largest forest , about the size of west virginia . 
mr. chairman , each year the timber industry is subsidized by millions of tax dollars , taxpayer , hard working funding tax dollars for logging in the tongass national forest , approximately $ 850 million since 1982 . 
there are already about 5 , 000 miles of roads in the tongass . 
to los angeles and most of the way back . 
that means that taxpayers are subsidizing each existing timber job to the tune of about $ 163 , 000 per job , about four times the median u.s. household income . 
in fact , the forest service has a 10-year supply of timber remaining off current roads . 
between 1998 and 2004 , half of tongass timber contracts went unsold . 
this means taxpayers spend millions of dollars for the forest service to build roads and plan sales to access timber they often can not even sell ; and those they do sell , they do so at below-market rates . 
i believe our forests should be actively managed so that they may be as healthy as possible ; but while we need to be good stewards of our forests , we must also be good stewards of the american people 's money . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , at the outset let me thank the gentleman from north carolina ( mr. taylor ) xz4003981 for bringing forward a bill that i believe addresses many of the critical issues for the department of the interior . 
it is impossible not to note that this budget environment creates genuinely tough challenges for the department of the interior . 
the bids came in high due to the rising cost of materials . 
before the project could be downsized the department of the interior had to reprogram these funds for emergency wildfire suppression . 
each year , 850 billion gallons of contaminated sewage poisons lakes , rivers , and oceans each year . 
by permitting `` blending '' during standard weather systems , we are providing our citizens with a false sense of security that we are furnishing them with safe conditions . 
when the secondary treatment of sewage water is sidestepped , the citizens face exposure to viruses , parasites , bacteria , and toxic chemicals that can cause hepatitis a and giardia . 
by allowing routine blending , it will only increase the concentration of the contaminant in our environment . 
for example , constructing additional facilities to hold sewage until it is fully treated can transfer some of the overflow problem . 
mr. chairman , i raise a point of order against section 413 of h.r. 2361 , on the grounds that this provision changes existing law in violation of clause 2 ( b ) of house rule xxi , and therefore is legislation included in a general appropriation bill . 
mr. chairman , we have fought over the last few years to reinsert funding for the park service to take care of their uncontrollable costs , and we had a hard time doing that . 
mr. chairman , i reserve a point of order against the amendment . 
mr. chairman , i raise a point of order against the amendment . 
i do it with great respect for the chairman , but i just worry about what the consequences of his amendment would be to this bill . 
therefore , mr. chairman , i raise a point of order against the amendment because it proposes to change existing law and constitutes legislation in an appropriation bill and therefore violates clause 2 of rule xxi . 
it is just that there seems to be an unwillingness on the part of this administration to face up to the reality of how much money is needed to take care of the veterans . 
and with the war raging in iraq , and with the seriousness of the injuries , any of us who have been out to walter reed or to bethesda to see these heroic young men and women who have come back with these very severe wounds , i think all of us want to see the best care given to our veterans . 
we have been reading about post-traumatic stress syndrome and the consequences and the effect on the lives of these soldiers and sailors and marines when they come home after having been involved in the kind of violent combat that is being seen in iraq . 
i had a chance to visit the va hospital in seattle recently , and i was told by the people there that they still have a backlog , a waiting list of 2 , 500 people waiting to get their appointments at the seattle va . 
mr. speaker , i want to say that i believe the other body was correct in adding this money , but this is not something that normally would be part of the interior appropriations bill . 
i hope that it will be unanimous that every member of the house will vote for this because i think we should do as much as we can to take care of the legitimate needs of these people . 
has the committee held any hearings on why they are having all of these financial difficulties ? 
mr. chairman , the provision in the fiscal year 2006 appropriations bill that is the subject of this amendment would allow the fish and wildlife service to sell public lands in the lower klamath and tule lake wildlife refuges , and use the profits from the land sales to buy water rights . 
none of the delegation , which , i might add , is represented by four of us from the areas that represents this area , had approved this provision ; and the department of the interior failed to communicate their desire to implement this program to the relevant members of congress . 
as members of congress whose constituents would be affected by a provision such as this , we feel it is necessary to have time to review the proposal in order to ensure that the proposed program best suits the needs of the local communities in our districts . 
i might add that this event represents a trend of continuous poor communication by the department of the interior and therefore we must ask that our amendment be adopted . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , the author of this amendment , the gentleman from michigan ( mr. stupak ) xz4003910 , is a good man and a good friend of mine and i think he is well intentioned , but i think my colleagues should know that this amendment is opposed by the u.s. conference of mayors , the national league of cities , the national association of counties , the national rural water association , and 38 other national and state water organizations whose job it is to protect the environment and provide communities with clean water . 
that is only a very small percentage of the time , usually maybe 2 or 3 percent . 
if blending is prohibited , then cities like atlanta , detroit , cincinnati , tacoma , portland , oregon , boston and many , many others would have to spend billions of dollars to change their wastewater treatment plant designs , all to deal with extreme wet weather events that occur only once or twice a year . 
blending has been mischaracterized as the discharge of raw sewage . 
during normal dry weather operation of a typical wastewater treatment plant , the wastewater receives three stages of treatment : solids removal , biological treatment , and disinfection . 
during extreme wet weather events , wastewater flows can exceed the capacity of the biological treatment unit . 
this blending does not mean the discharge of raw sewage into any river or waterway . 
this practice is not a bypass around treatment because it is part of the plant 's permitted treatment design . 
let me just tell you a few quotes from some of the experts . 
one person from the ohio river valley water sanitation commission said , `` in the case of the ohio river , without our blending policy more untreated overflows would occur and the water quality impacts of wet weather would be more damaging. '' the head of an agency in california said , `` with blending , our member communities can provide the maximum clean water treatment possible to unpredictable , exceptionally heavy rains and snowmelt , while still meeting permit limits which are set to protect public health and the environment. '' a water executive from little rock , arkansas , said , `` blending protects public utility infrastructure by preventing washout of sensitive biological systems and protects public health and private property. '' another official said , `` a prohibition of blending will result in the need for extremely expensive facility upgrades that will not result in any meaningful improvement to water quality or protection of the public health. '' if we prohibit blending , it will cause worse environmental trouble than if we allow these experts and these utilities to proceed with it . 
there is a lot of misunderstanding on this issue . 
in february , in fact , of 2004 , nearly a year and a half ago , republican chairman of the house committee on veterans ' affairs , the gentleman from new jersey ( mr. smith ) xz4003802 , and his democratic ranking member , the gentleman from illinois ( mr. evans ) xz4001260 , in a bipartisan letter predicted the administration request for va health care for this year would be $ 2.5 billion short . 
now , mr. speaker , what was the reaction of the house republican leadership ? 
they fired the gentleman from new jersey ( mr. smith ) xz4003802 from his job as chairman of the house committee on veterans ' affairs and even took him completely off the committee . 
the house republican leadership punished a member of congress , a member of its own party , for putting loyalty to veterans above loyalty to the house leadership during a time of war . 
at every step of the way over the past 2 years , in the committee on the budget , in amendments there ; in the committee on appropriations , in amendments there ; in the 302 ( b ) allocation , the amount of money for veterans ' care in the committee on appropriations , in all of these places and on this house floor repeatedly the house leadership has fought against the money needed to adequately support our veterans ' health care needs during a time of our war on terrorism . 
it is time for republicans and democrats alike , today , to do the right thing and to instruct the conferees on the interior appropriations bill to support the same $ 1.5 billion emergency veterans ' health care funding that was approved by a bipartisan vote of 96 to 0 weeks ago in the senate . 
standing up for veterans may have cost the gentleman from new jersey ( mr. smith ) xz4003802 his job as chairman of the house committee on veterans ' affairs , but it was the right thing to do . 
mr. speaker , i thank the gentleman from wisconsin for yielding me this time and for his leadership on behalf of our nation 's veterans , leadership which has sorely been lacking in this house . 
the head of the office of management and budget actually had the nerve to testify before the committee on the budget that over the last 3 years the veterans administration had received $ .5 billion more than it actually needed , more than it actually needed , when we have waiting lists which the gentleman outlined , when we have nursing and medical vacancies , when we have maintenance backlogs , when we have people waiting a year for an appointment for a dentist , and months and months for surgeries that are needed . 
then the secretary of our veterans administration testified before committees of this congress that we got it wrong because we had a bad mathematical model . 
we had a mathematical model that did not take into account the fact that there was a war going on and thousands of troops were coming back with significant injuries and with post-traumatic stress disorder . 
many are suffering today as a result of that decision . 
and , mr. speaker , when we had a chance to help the veterans before our last recess , the chairman of the committee on veterans ' affairs said , we can only give $ 975 million , that that was the right number , while the senate did $ 1.5 billion , which we are now instructing our house to accept today . 
this could have been signed by the president several weeks ago , yet in my hometown of san diego , we have 1 , 000 people on a waiting list just to have their first appointment . 
the democrats in this congress have tried at every level , on the committee on the budget , on the committee on appropriations , in the senate , in the house , and we tried on the floor of this house to give the independent budget numbers the force of law , but we were voted down on pure party-line votes . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
of the 30 , 000 horses we are talking about , 20 , 000 of them are in the second district of nevada . 
this amendment , if it is passed , will be a rule of unintended consequences on what happens to the management of these horses . 
these horses get starved , they are weakened , they become diseased and , of course , they are not as easily adopted as before . 
if this amendment is passed , the unintended consequence will be to prevent the bureau of land management from properly managing . 
the bureau of land management today announced strict new rules for the sale of wild horses . 
these changes will ensure america 's wild horses and burros go to good homes , and the new rules will expressly prohibit the sale of these animals for slaughter . 
buyers can not sell or transfer ownership of any of the purchased horses or burros to any person or organization that intend to process them for commercial products . 
in sum , the new blm rules will make it a crime to sell wild horses for slaughter , yet will allow for the sale of these animals to buyers seeking to provide them good caring homes . 
i applaud the bush administration and the bureau of land management for taking responsible action to assure america 's wild horses and burros are cared for , and i would like to thank the ford motor company and the take pride in america program , which this amendment will stop dead in its tracks , for supporting blm in this effort and creating the save the mustangs fund . 
mr. chairman , this is one of those issues where our opponents are trying to use emotion to overwhelm good policy . 
as is usually the case in such debates , the results are exactly the opposite of what is being advocated . 
so it is with the proposal to revoke the secretary of interior 's authority to sell excess wild horses and burros . 
ironically , rather than saving wild horses , the amendment will have the perverse effect of ensuring their numbers will stay at unsustainable levels , adoption efforts will be hampered , and thousands of old unadoptable horses will stay stuck in limbo in long-term holding facilities , or as the gentleman from kentucky suggested , euthanized . 
oh , that makes a lot of sense . 
this is what you get with this kind of policy , horses that are starving to death on the range . 
the blm has conducted an analysis of their wild horse and burro program and determined that if they had not removed many of the wild horses from the range , prolonged drought , reduced forage production , and poor health would have resulted in large losses during the winter of 2005 . 
it is ironic that the authority that was used to save nearly 2 , 000 horses this past year is the very authority the sponsors of this amendment are trying to repeal . 
if this amendment prevails , the only method to remove these horses will be adoption , which historically has failed to keep up with the explosion of the population . 
inadequacy of the adoption program has resulted in many of these horses being sentenced to spend the rest of their lives in long-term facilities unsuitable for wild horses . 
mr. chairman , this is one of those issues where our opponents are trying to use emotion to overwhelm good policy . 
as is usually the case in such debates , the results are exactly the opposite of what is being advocated . 
so it is with the proposal to revoke the secretary of the interior 's authority to sell excess wild horses and burros . 
ironically , rather than saving wild horses , the amendment will have the perverse effect of ensuring that their numbers will stay at unsustainable levels , adoption efforts will be hampered , and thousands of old , unadoptable horses will stay stuck in limbo in long-term holding facilities . 
blm has conducted an analysis of their wild horse and burro program and determined that if they had not removed many of the wild horses from the range , prolonged drought , reduced forage production and poor health would have resulted in large losses during the winter of 2005 . 
it is ironic that the authority that was used to save nearly 2000 horses this past year is the very authority the sponsors of this amendment are trying to repeal . 
if this amendment prevails , the only method to remove these horses will be adoption , which historically has failed to keep up with the explosion of the population . 
inadequacy of the adoption program has resulted in many of these horses being sentenced to spend the rest of their life in long term unsuitable for wild holding facilities . 
because of the overwhelming cost of these facilities at the expense of the federal government , the number of horses on the range is still well above the appropriate management levels called for in law . 
furthermore , one-half of the entire wild horse and burro operating budget is used to take care of `` unadoptable '' horses held in these facilities . 
this amendment would only cause those costs to skyrocket at the expense of the adoption program . 
currently there are 8400 horses in these long term facilities that need to be moved on through the program in order to prevent malnutrition and starvation that is associated with the overpopulation of the range land herds . 
by denying the funds to implement the sale program for wild horses and burros , this irresponsible amendment would eliminate a far more efficient tool in the management of the program . 
by not allowing blm to keep the herd in manageable numbers , this amendment endangers the welfare of the wild horses by exacerbating the deplorable conditions these animals must try to survive in where their only escape is death by starvation . 
vote for the welfare of the wild horses . 
mr. speaker , i rise today in opposition to this rule , not because of what it allows but rather because of what it does not allow . 
as my colleague from the majority noted , this rule permits members to offer amendments to the interior and environment appropriations bill under the house 's 5-minute rule if they do not need waivers of the house rules . 
however , i am greatly concerned that the rule blocks the ranking democrat of the appropriations committee , my friend the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 , from offering a critical amendment which would have added $ 500 million to the bill to fully restore epa 's state and tribal grant program , and clean water state revolving fund to their fiscal 2004 levels . 
for the fiscally conservative in the house , the amendment of the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 was revenue neutral , paying for itself by capping the tax cut for millionaires at just over $ 138 , 000 . 
the amendment of the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 could have benefited literally millions of americans by making their drinking water cleaner . 
mr. speaker , we live in trying times with enormous fiscal constraints , many of which have been brought upon ourselves . 
as the chairman and ranking democrat of the interior and environmental appropriations subcommittee will probably note today , they did the best that they could with what they were given . 
the bill maintains funding for the national endowment of the arts at its current level , and it increases funding for the national endowment for the humanities by a little less than $ 500 , 000 . 
the bill also increases funding for operations at our national parks , as well as a $ 67 million much-needed increase in funding for the bureau of indian affairs . 
despite these increases the underlying legislation makes major cuts in funding to some of our most important environmental and health programs . 
conservation funding is about $ 750 million below , or less than half of what was promised when congress passed the conservation and restoration act in 2000 . 
this is only the second of 13 appropriations measures which this body will consider over the next few months . 
it is also the second appropriations bill in which we can see the drastic and dramatic effects of the bush tax cuts . 
republicans are going to try and associate domestic funding cuts with the cost of the war in iraq . 
what has ensued is not the fault of the appropriations committee , mr. speaker , it is the fault of those who supported the budget resolution . 
the gentlewoman from texas ( ms. eddie bernice johnson ) xz4002040 will also offer an amendment that will increase funding for the cleanup of brownfields sites by $ 2 million . 
additionally , i will offer an amendment that will require epa to identify and take the necessary steps to protect minority and low income communities from bearing a disproportionate burden of poor environmental policy which adversely affects their health and well being . 
all communities currently do not share in the burden of health and environmental risks , and my amendment expresses congress ' support for epa doing what is necessary to protect these communities . 
with innovation that can only occur in a consortium of stakeholders , the department of the interior can make major environmental restoration projects a reality . 
everyone in america shares in the responsibility of contributing his or her own fair share . 
if given the chance , who would not be willing to pool his or her resources with others in his or her neighborhood to collectively ensure that everyone , everyone , has safe drinking water , or that no child will be forced to grow up playing in backyards polluted by dangerous levels of mercury and other toxins . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i am a bit confuzzled by the continuing argument of my colleague and friend on the committee on rules that his state is impacted by virtue of education formulas . 
i do not disagree with what the gentleman says , but i find it interesting that the state of utah , while the gentleman from utah ( mr. bishop ) xz4000291 is arguing that they are not getting enough money for education , the state of utah legislature passed measures saying they do not want any federal money for education . 
mr. speaker , i yield 7 minutes to the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 , ranking member of the committee on appropriations . 
mr. speaker , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
if the previous question is defeated , i will amend the rule so we can consider the amendment of the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 that was rejected in the rules committee last night on a straight party-line vote . 
i find it incomprehensible that we do not understand the dynamics of that or that most if not all of us in this body do not have communities that would benefit from modernizing our water systems . 
this amendment will correct one of the most serious shortfalls in this bill . 
however , a `` yes '' vote will block consideration of the obey amendment . 
mr. speaker , i ask unanimous consent to insert the text of the amendment immediately prior to the vote . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise today to offer an amendment to h.r. 2361 that is of critical importance to the health and well-being of minority and low-income communities throughout the united states . 
it prohibits the epa from using funds in this bill to work in contravention of executive order 12898 and delay the implementation of that order . 
in adopting my amendment , congress will call on epa to move forward with the identification of at-risk minority and low-income communities so appropriate steps can be taken to improve their health and well-being . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i include for the record the findings of the epa inspector general report and those in support of the amendment . 
evaluation report : epa needs to consistently implement the intent of the executive order on environmental justice -- report no . 
2004-p-00007 -- march 1 , 2004 purpose in 1994 , president clinton issued executive order 12898 , `` federal action to address environmental justice in minority populations and low-income populations , '' to ensure such populations are not subjected to a disproportionately high level of environmental risk . 
the overall objective of this evaluation was to determine how the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) is integrating environmental justice into its day-to-day operations . 
moreover , in 2001 , the agency restated its commitment to environmental justice in a manner that does not emphasize minority and low-income populations , the intent of the executive order . 
in the absence of environmental justice definitions , criteria , or standards from the agency , many regional and program offices have taken steps , individually , to implement environmental justice policies . 
thus , the implementation of environmental justice actions is dependent not only on minority and income status but on the epa region in which the person resides . 
our comparison of how environmental justice protocols used by three different regions would apply to the same city showed a wide disparity in protected populations . 
we believe the agency is bound by the requirements of executive order 12898 and does not have the authority to reinterpret the order . 
after 10 years , there is an urgent need for the agency to standardize environmental justice definitions , goals , and measurements for the consistent implementation and integration of environmental justice at epa . 
recommendations we recommended that the acting deputy administrator issue a memorandum reaffirming that executive order 12898 is an agency priority and that minority and low-income populations disproportionately impacted will be the beneficiaries of this executive order . 
additionally , epa should establish specific time frames for the development of definitions , goals , and measurements . 
we also recommended that epa develop a comprehensive strategic plan , ensure appropriate training is provided , clearly define the mission of the office of environmental justice , determine if adequate resources are being applied to environmental justice , and develop a systematic approach to gathering information related to environmental justice . 
agency comments and oig evaluation in the response to our draft report , the agency disagreed with the central premise that executive order 12898 requires the agency to identify and address the environmental effects of its programs on minority and low-income populations . 
the agency believes the executive order `` instructs the agency to identify and address the disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental , effects of it ( sic ) programs , policies , and activities. '' the agency does not take into account the inclusion of the minority and low-income populations , and indicated it is attempting to provide environmental justice for everyone . 
while providing adequate environmental justice to the entire population is commendable , doing so had already been epa 's mission prior to implementation of the executive order ; we do not a summary of the agency 's response and our evaluation is included at the end of each chapter . 
the agency 's complete response and our evaluation of that response are included in appendices d and e , respectively . 
dear representative : on behalf of our organizations , members , and supporters nationwide , we write to express our support for representative alcee hastings ' ( d-fl ) environmental justice amendment that will be offered to the interior-epa appropriations bill . 
the hastings amendment will ensure that funds spent at the u.s. epa can not be spent in any way that conflicts with the 1994 executive order `` federal actions to address environmental justice in minority populations and low-income populations. '' eo 12898 directs each federal agency to develop an environmental justice strategy `` that identifies and addresses disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects of its programs , policies , or activities on minority populations and low-income populations '' with the goal of achieving equity in federally-funded programs for those communities . 
the hastings amendment is needed to get epa to take the next steps that are needed to achieve the promise of fairness and equal treatment for minority and low-income communities in federal environmental programs . 
studies conducted by both government and non-government panels , including the national academy of sciences and the united church of christ have found that minority and low-income communities experience greater and more frequent exposures to unhealthy levels of environmental pollutants than other communities . 
bush created the office of environmental equity at epa ( now the office of environmental justice ) ; it was addressed a second time by president clinton , when he issued the executive order in 1994 . 
the agency 's failure to move forward on the important issue of environmental justice has been the hastings amendment does not place new requirements on the epa , but rather provides direction for the agency to fulfill its longstanding obligation to ensure that minority and low-income populations are not exposed to dangerous and disproportionately high levels of air pollution , water contamination , toxic hazards , or other environmental and health threats in their communities . 
we urge you to cast your vote in support of the hastings environmental justice amendment . 
reynolds , president , calhoun county chapter of the southern christian leadership conference ( anniston , al ) . 
robert o. muller , president , vietnam veterans of america foundation ; evelyn yates , president , pine bluff for safe disposal ( pine bluff , ar ) ; john nunn , president , coalition for safe disposal ( worton , md ) ; karyn jones , president , gasp ( hermiston , or ) ; j. daryl byler , director , mennonite central committee washington office ; vernice miller-travis , miller-travis & amp ; associates , ( washington , dc ) ; donele wilkins , executive director , detroiters working for environmental justice ; and monique harden , co-director , nathalie walker , co-director , advocates for environmental human rights ( new orleans , la ) . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , the amendment is identical to those i have offered to appropriations bills for the past couple of years . 
as always , they have done a solid job of this . 
i understand the dynamics of bringing a bill out of committee . 
that said , i do not think the funding levels of this bill are reflective of a country with a $ 340 billion deficit . 
despite the stripped-down character of the bill , i think there are still some areas worthy of examination . 
some years ago as a member of the house interior committee , i heard testimony on de-accessioning the kennedy center from the national park service . 
james wolfensohn , its director and later head of the world bank , pleaded with the subcommittee to cut the center loose . 
he said the center needed millions of dollars in structural repairs , yet he could not move forward on them because of the park service contracting requirements and inflated costs . 
we got rid of the kennedy center , except that we did not really . 
now , i know the kennedy center has serious structural problems , but given the legislative history of this issue , i would like to know how long we are going to continue to have this center that we have to fund . 
i question whether the various agencies really need all of the new vehicles authorized in this bill . 
i question some of the administrative accounts . 
the chairman has done a fine job in reining in costs , particularly in the area of land acquisition ; but at a time of a $ 300-plus million deficit , we need to do more . 
even in a small way , i encourage support of this amendment . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise in strong support of this amendment offered by my colleagues which will prevent the epa from finalizing a policy that may increase the risks of waterborne illness and harm our nation 's waterways . 
thirty-three years after the passage of the clean water act , the epa should not be implementing policies which will allow more sewage into our waterways . 
the use of secondary biological treatment to remove bacteria and pathogens from sewage has been in place for decades in order to protect the public from waterborne illnesses , and i believe we must preserve these longstanding standards . 
blending waste streams at times other than natural emergencies will result in an unnecessary discharge of harmful contaminants into our waters . 
i plan soon on reintroducing my bill , the clean water infrastructure financing act , which will authorize funding levels in the clean water state revolving fund which better reflect the considerable depth of our nation 's wastewater infrastructure needs . 
effective sewage treatment will reduce the risk of waterborne illness and protect public health . 
i would also like to thank my colleagues mr. taylor and mr. dicks and their staff for their hard work with the difficult task of putting this bill together . 
i want to really applaud the gentleman from michigan for putting together a truly bipartisan amendment that not only put together a broad coalition of members in this house , including the chairman of the subcommittee , who has accepted the amendment , to stop this blending regulation . 
we all saw when milwaukee dumped over 4 billion gallons of sewage into lake michigan just last year and an incredible rise in the number of beach closings along the illinois shoreline : nine in glencoe , 12 in wilmette , 34 in winnetka , a rising tide of dirty water that would have been increased with this . 
thanks to his work and members on both sides of this aisle , the epa has largely accepted what this amendment would have already laid out and have stopped this regulation . 
this department of the interior appropriations bill as written is a direct assault against our nation 's environment , and it should be defeated . 
i am particularly outraged that the bill completely zeros out the stateside grant program of the land and water conservation fund , a program that has been an enormous help to our local communities and the families who live in them . 
when congress decided to open the outercontinental shelf to oil drilling , we pledged to use some of its revenues for the public good . 
with the goal of meeting the nation 's growing need for recreation sites , congress established the lwcf trust fund and agreed to reinvest an annual portion of ocs revenue into federal land acquisition and state-assistance development programs . 
now even though lwcf takes in $ 900 million annually from oil and gas receipts , in recent years just a fraction of this funding has been used for its rightful purpose . 
in all , the stateside program has helped communities by funding 40 , 000 projects nationally , success stories that can be found in every state and in 98 percent of u.s. counties . 
they created this mess , and now the families of this country are paying the price . 
i represent the merrimack valley region of massachusetts . 
the challenge to control cso 's has been both of technical and financial feasibility . 
some treatment plants use a blending bypass during periods of heavy weather so that cso 's receive some treatment rather than none at all . 
i , in fact , have been involved in the construction of and the management of wastewater treatment plants . 
we are not in any way trying to stop the issue of blending during the storm season , but the fact of the matter is , in 2003 there were more than 18 , 000 closings or advisories around the united states and that was 5 , 000 more than ever at any time before . 
these closings were due to fecal coliform increases in bacterial levels outside of the norm . 
the fact of the matter is it does not take a medical degree to understand that this is a health issue for our families and our children that are out there that are actually swimming sometimes in this waste . 
in fact , we are looking at the blending of untreated solid free waste with treated sewage . 
mr. chairman , i am pleased to support the amendment to the department of the interior appropriations bill being offered by mr. rahall and mr. whitfield to help save a national treasure -- the wild horse . 
the wild horse is known throughout the world as a symbol of the american west , and we should be doing everything we can to protect it . 
at the turn of the 20th century there were more than one million horses roaming the vast lands of our west , however by 1971 that number dropped to approximately 60 , 000 due to the actions of their main predator -- humans . 
public outcry and the work of a group of citizens lead by wild horse annie forced congress to find a solution and pass the wild free roaming horse and burro protection act to protect the wild horse . 
i was saddened to learn about the provision in last year 's omnibus appropriations bill that would allow the sale of any wild horse that has been rounded up and is more than ten years old . 
because of this provision , at least forty-one wild horses have needlessly been slaughtered . 
if we do not pass this amendment to ensure that no tax dollars are used for any sale of wild thousands more could lose their lives . 
the bureau of land management could reopen over one hundred herd management areas or use animal contraception methods to keep the size of the herds manageable . 
it is a beloved literary figure , a character in a movie or television show , a symbol of adventure , a friend of the cowboy , and an important part of our history . 
william shakespeare once stated that horses were , `` as full of spirit as the month of may , and as gorgeous as the sun in midsummer. '' i can say it no better and encourage all of my colleagues to join me and support the rahall-whitfield amendment and help save the wild horse . 
190 , on ordering the previous question to provide for consideration of h.r. 2361 , making appropriations for the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies for the fiscal year ending september 39 , 2006 and for other purposes . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of the amendment . 
the amendment offered by my colleague from michigan would prohibit the environmental protection agency from spending any of the funds provided by this bill to finalize any new policy related to sewage blending . 
mr. chairman , when epa proposed to issue a new policy document on sewage blending , i was concerned that it could cause an increase in the frequency of blending by those communities that current use the practice , and an increase in the number of communities that use the practice . 
i do not believe that there currently is enough information available to epa and state permit writers to know that any increase in the use of blending is protective of human health and the environment . 
that is why i believe that issuing a policy that could increase the use of blending is wrong . 
sewage blending is the practice of taking partially treated wastewater , mixing it with fully treated wastewater , and then relying on the dilution to meet discharge limits . 
congress intended that all domestic sewage receive a minimum of secondary treatment , and greater levels of treatment where water quality demanded it . 
since sewage blending is a process that is used only during periods of high flows , then the question presents itself as to whether blending complies with the secondary treatment requirements . 
even the proponents of blending acknowledge that blending is used only in limited high flow circumstances -- at all other times the sewage otherwise receives full secondary treatment the current , acknowledged limitations on the use of blending lead to the question -- if blending constitutes secondary treatment , then why is it not acceptable all the time , or if it does not constitute secondary treatment , why is it allowed at all ? 
recently , the epa assistant administrator for water acknowledged , `` the heart and soul of the clean water act , is that dilution is not the solution to pollution , that you need to treat the sewage . 
[ epa ] want [ s ] to make sure that it only occurs in the very limited , narrow circumstances and that it meets all requirements in their clean water act permit , and that water quality standards downstream are also maintained. '' mr. chairman , increasing the use of blending is not an acceptable long-term solution to meeting secondary treatment requirements . 
i support the amendment to bring the expanded use of blending policy to a halt . 
mr. speaker , i will be voting against the previous question on the rule , and after the bill is considered , unless it is substantially changed , i will be intending to vote against the bill itself for a variety of reasons . 
my main reason is this bill represents gross negligence of our responsibility to clean up the nation 's air and water pollution . 
if there is any member of this chamber who has a district that does not have a community that needs more loans to fix their sewer and water problems , would you please raise your hand . 
i note no member of the house present has raised his hand . 
mr. speaker , i would say there is a great deal of hypocrisy surrounding the budget process . 
every time that those of us on this side of the aisle point to the shortcomings in the budget that the republican majority has just passed , we hear , `` well , we ca n't do anything about these shortages in the appropriation bills because , after all , we have limited resources. '' the gentleman who just spoke , the gentleman from utah , said the appropriations process , quote , `` should prioritize our needs. '' i fully agree . 
the only way that we can change that priority judgment is by offering the amendment that i wanted to offer , which would have scaled back the size of those tax cuts for anybody making a million dollars a year or more . 
imagine those poor souls having to get by with a tax cut of only $ 138 , 000 . 
but i do believe that people who are the most blessed in our society ought to pay their fair share and the budget resolution which was imposed on this committee by this house does not allow us to reach that kind of fair distribution of tax burden . 
so if we object to that what i regard to be not just ill-advised but immoral allocation of resources , the only device that we have to try to change that is to try to make our point on each of these appropriation bills trying to get the majority party to understand that just as they reconsidered their unilateral actions on ethics committee changes a couple of weeks ago , we would also like them to reconsider their poor judgment on the budget resolution . 
the gentleman may not want it in his state , but there are key tracts of land that we want the government to acquire in my state , there are key tracts of land we want the government to acquire , for instance , at george washington 's birthplace before real estate developers destroy that beauty for all time . 
but most of all the biggest problem with this bill is that it walks away from our obligation to help state and local governments clean up some of the dirtiest rivers and dirtiest lakes in the country . 
that is an outrageous neglect of our stewardship responsibilities . 
i certainly am in support of the intention of the gentleman 's request , but it is my understanding that there may be a problem with one of the amendments . 
mr. speaker , with that understanding , i withdraw my reservation of objection . 
mr. chairman , at this point i had intended to offer an amendment to the stupak amendment because i am certainly in support of the content . 
it is very good that this amendment is being adopted , but it again illustrates the need for , in fact , increasing , rather than reducing , the amount of money that we put into the clean water revolving fund , and i would hope that we would remember this as the bill goes through the system because we can avoid controversies such as this . 
we can avoid putting epa into a position of even considering such an outlandish regulation if we are providing much more by way of financial help to the communities so that they will not be concerned about stiffening epa regulations to protect public health . 
mr. chairman , my understanding is that there are no other amendments left to the bill , and i simply want to say that i think the chairman of the subcommittee has been very fair and balanced in the way he has approached the bill . 
i think the bill is not fair and balanced , not because of anything the gentleman from north carolina ( mr. taylor ) xz4003981 did , but simply because it could not be under the budget adopted by the majority party 2 weeks ago . 
i am simply not going to vote to gut the main program that we use to help local communities to deal with a $ 300 billion-plus backlog of decrepit sewer and water systems . 
i am not going to vote to leave 200 of our 544 wildlife refuges without a single staff person . 
i am not going to vote to cripple epa enforcement programs to the tune of $ 400 million . 
this bill does all of those things , not because the gentleman from north carolina ( mr. taylor ) xz4003981 wanted to , but simply because of what the majority leader said 2 weeks ago when he said , `` this is the budget the american people voted for when they voted for a republican house , a republican senate , and a republican white house. '' i do not agree with mr. delay xz4001040 on much , but i agree with him in that assessment . 
so i would simply say , if members are comfortable with implementing that kind of a budget that puts $ 140 , 000 tax cuts for millionaires ahead of protecting american children from dirty drinking water , then they ought to feel comfortable voting `` yes. '' i am not , and i will vote `` no . '' 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , for the past 3 years , a number of us on this side of the aisle , including the gentleman from texas ( mr. edwards ) xz4001180 , myself and several others , have tried to bring the administration to the realization that we needed many more dollars in the veterans health care funds than , in fact , they requested each year . 
we have heard that thousands of patients have had to wait more than 3 months for appointments in california . 
we have heard of 6-month delays in emergency surgery in oregon . 
yet , in the face of stories like that , in april va secretary nicholson told the congress that no additional funds would be needed for fiscal year 2005 . 
but by the end of june he had to admit that there was a big problem , and he then testified that an additional $ 975 million was needed . 
they provided $ 1.5 billion of emergency money for the va . 
that would cover the immediate $ 975 million shortfall and provide an additional $ 525 million that could be distributed among the va regions to take care of the source of problems that each of us has been hearing about . 
i would point out also that in my view some members of this house have paid a very high price for speaking out on behalf of our veterans . 
we saw earlier this year news stories which reported the fact that the majority caucus not only removed from his chairmanship but removed from the committee itself the member on the other side of the aisle who chaired the committee in charge of veterans funding because he had been too insistent in agreeing with those of us on this side of the aisle who kept insisting that we needed more funding for veterans health care . 
so i would simply urge each and every member of this house to vote for this motion . 
it is just a question of how many times we have to hit the house along side the head before , like a stubborn donkey , they finally recognize that something needs to be done . 
i would hope this would receive the unanimous support of the members of the house . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i yield 3 minutes to the distinguished ranking member of the subcommittee , the gentleman from washington ( mr. dicks ) xz4001090 . 
mr. speaker , i yield 3 minutes to the distinguished gentleman from texas ( mr. edwards ) xz4001180 , who has been a key leader on this issue as the ranking member of the subcommittee on military quality of life and veterans affairs , and related agencies . 
first of all , one of the previous speakers tried to suggest that , in fact , the gentleman from new jersey ( mr. smith ) xz4003802 had not been fired by the majority party caucus because he had been too willing to speak his own mind about the needs that he saw for veterans ' health care . 
the fact is that we know what the facts are , or were , i should say , with respect to the removal of the gentleman from new jersey from office . 
secondly , the gentleman from new york indicated that there had been a variety of estimates about what would be needed for veterans health care funding this year . 
thirdly , i would simply say that the administration 's denial of the truth on this matter follows a pattern . 
in that sense , it is very similar to the action of the administration in threatening to fire the government official who tried to tell congress what the true cost of the prescription drugs under medicare proposal was that the administration proposed last year . 
lastly , i would simply say one of the previous speakers raised the question as to why we were providing this money as an emergency . 
it would be nice if during that war we had a sense of shared sacrifice that was conveyed to each and every citizen of this country . 
we have a narrow band of people , those in the uniformed services of the united states , who are being asked to sacrifice virtually everything while 90 percent of american society is making no sacrifice about the war . 
it is only a precious few military families who are bearing the entire burden of that war . 
unfortunately , we have not demonstrated that because of the shortfalls that we have seen in the veterans ' health care budget . 
i would hope that we would adopt an understanding that if we ask someone to put his very life at risk , to put his family 's future at risk and go to war to defend an action of the president of the united states , i would hope that we would recognize that we have a concurrent and permanent obligation to each and every one of those soldiers to meet the full cost of meeting their health care needs , their education needs , and their economic readjustment needs when they return to this country . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
our public lands are of multiple use and must be managed for a variety of purposes , including hunting , grazing , fishing , recreating , wildlife , and many other uses . 
serious-minded conservation groups , such as the national association of conservation districts , the international association of fish and wildlife agencies , the nature 's conservancy , and others have recognized the damage caused by these horses . 
all this , mr. chairman , has been said before , and i am not going to go into it again , except i will tell you that without this authority the only feasible option is leaving unadopted excess animals in contracted long-term holding facilities that we are now doing to the cost of at least $ 9 million a year . 
the loss of this new tool in selling would only mean that priority funding will keep going to care for and feed unadoptable animals instead of managing the number on the range and in balance with the demands of our other resources . 
mr. chairman , i am also pleased to be a cosponsor of this amendment . 
in fact , it would have no effect on any currently permitted uses of blending . 
i have been fighting this proposal every step of the way and the epa has finally said they are not going to do it . 
you can still do it during a serious rain event , but you should not be allowed to do it anytime you want because that is going to increase tremendously the volume of material that does not have secondary treatment . 
mr. chairman , our communities are on the front lines in their attempts to meet the requirements of the clean water act . 
hundreds of billions of dollars are needed to meet real and pressing needs , and the federal government is not paying its fair share . 
as a former mayor and lifelong resident of paterson , nj , i can personally attest that our cities are struggling to make ends meet . 
my state of new jersey will have lost $ 20 million alone . 
i would also like to thank my chairman of the water resources subcommittee , mr. duncan . 
mr. chairman , i make a point of order against the amendment . 
under the amendment , the limit on funds does not apply to roads under construction on the date of enactment of this bill making this determination is far from simple . 
therefore , determining the construction status of roads in the tongass would take considerable effort on the part of the forest service . 
i ask the chair to sustain my point of order . 
because the interior appropriations bill often combines both authorized and unauthorized programs in a single number , such as funding for survey activities of the u.s. geological survey , the amendment assures that these programs which are authorized by fiscal year 2006 , their funding can not continue . 
the purpose of this amendment is to give us the ability to go back and authorize a number of these programs that have not been authorized for years and in some cases in excess of a dozen years . 
one of the major problems that we have is the committee on appropriations gets in the position of having to continue to appropriate money on these unauthorized programs because they are important programs . 
i believe that the taxpayer demands that we do our job in authorizing these programs and make sure that the public is getting their money 's worth out of these different programs . 
the gentleman from north carolina ( mr. taylor ) xz4003981 and the gentleman from washington ( mr. dicks ) xz4001090 have worked with us on a number of different things that are in this bill over the past year . 
but when it comes to some of these major programs that we have not been able to get an authorization on , i believe the time is now for us to move forward and begin to fence off those moneys until we can get an authorization done . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
it seems kind of ironic that my amendment that goes after unauthorized programs would be ruled out of order for the very reason that i have been going after those programs . 
although i appreciate the good intentions of this amendment , i am deeply concerned about its potential for unintended consequences . 
in restricting the ability of the bureau of land management ( blm ) to sell wild horses and burros under the wild horse and burro act of 1971 , we are also restricting opportunities for responsible owners or groups to purchase horses that might have otherwise been sentenced to spend their lives in holding facilities or to starve on our rangelands . 
i disagree with the actions of individuals who purchased horses under the act and then sold them to a slaughter plant ; however , i do not believe that we should prohibit responsible people from purchasing wild horses due to the actions of a few . 
although i agree that wild horses are a symbol of the american west , i also believe that it is the responsibility of congress to ensure that these animals are managed , protected , and controlled in an effective manner . 
it is a fact that the current number of wild horses in the nation greatly exceeds the ability of the blm or the land to handle these animals . 
the adoption authority granted under the wild horse and burro act of 1971 has historically failed to keep up with the growth of the wild horse population . 
our wild horses are already competing for scarce sources of food and water on rangelands in arid states like nevada , causing many of them to waste into skin and bones . 
i believe that some of these horses should be allowed to be sold to good homes , where they can receive proper nourishment and veterinary care , as opposed to competing for little food and water in the wild or being held in long-term holding pens . 
this incentive will be dependent on a number of requirements , one of which will be that these animals can not be sold to slaughter . 
mr. chairman , i am offering this amendment on behalf of myself , the gentleman from kentucky ( mr. whitfield ) xz4004310 , the gentleman from new york ( mr. sweeney ) xz4003930 , and the gentleman from south carolina ( mr. spratt ) xz4003860 . 
part of that heritage are the herds of wild horses , direct descendants of animals that came here with early explorers and missionaries , which still roam the ranges in parts of the american west . 
since that time , when the bureau of land management has determined that the wild horse population is excessive to the ability of the range to support them , captured animals have been offered to the public through adoption . 
all of that changed as a result of a rider tucked away in the dead of night in the massive omnibus appropriations bill enacted last december . 
with no public notice or comment , this rider trashed 33 years of national policy and lifted the prohibition on the commercial sale of america 's wild horses . 
so far this year , 41 wild horses that we know of have been sent to one of the three foreign-owned slaughterhouses in this country . 
we do not allow the commercial sale of horse flesh in this country for human consumption , but we are exporting horse meat for that purpose abroad . 
since introducing the legislation which is the basis for this amendment , i have received an impressive volume of heartfelt letters and e-mails from across the nation . 
they see in this issue the pioneering spirit and the ideals of freedom , and the current policy has created disillusionment with many over how their government works and what their elected leaders stand for . 
from florida , stacey wrote , `` knowing that the horses wo n't be there for my kids has made me feel sad , hurt and angry at our government. '' a former west virginian named valerie who now resides in nevada wrote , `` i , and our friends , have enjoyed going on to the desert to see wild horses roaming free. '' jeremy from oregon wrote , `` your support will help to restore the public 's confidence by assuring us that congress operates under the principles of for the people and by the people. '' we must restore the people 's faith . 
we must stop the slaughter of these american icons . 
a week and a half ago , an annual rite of spring was held called the running of the kentucky derby , a uniquely american institution . 
i am wearing on my lapel a pin here , a symbol which bears the likeness of ferdinand who won the 1986 derby and the 1987 breeders ' cup classic , notable achievements . 
as children , many of us recall reading the compelling story in the book `` misty of chincoteague. '' what type of message would we be sending today 's youth if misty was rounded up and sent to be slaughtered . 
mr. chairman , i yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from kentucky ( mr. whitfield ) xz4004310 , a cosponsor of the amendment . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from kentucky ( mr. whitfield ) xz4004310 , the cosponsor of the amendment . 
these are alternatives rather than the slaughter of these animals . 
in regard to what the gentleman from nevada said , that blm has recently done , what blm has proposed in the last day or two in an effort to head off the successful passage of this amendment is illegal under the change in law that was made by the omnibus appropriation bill last year . 
and i would say to the distinguished chairman of the subcommittee , in defense of the gentleman from california ( mr. pombo ) xz4003220 and myself on the authorizing committee , this change was made in an appropriation bill , not in an authorization bill . 
so i would urge that my colleagues look at the humane side of this amendment , look at what is only fair to these american icons and vote for the rahall-whitfield-sweeney-spratt amendment . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i demand a recorded vote , and pending that , i make the point of order that a quorum is not present . 
mr. chairman , i am very pleased to offer this amendment along with my colleagues because the epa 's proposed guidance would hurt water treatment practices already in place in my home state of florida . 
governor jeb bush and the florida department of environmental protection support this amendment . 
there is a rumor , as has just been expressed by my friend from tennessee , that our amendment would cost upwards of $ 200 billion in added costs to cities . 
it simply allows cities and states to maintain their current level of water treatment practices . 
florida has a higher level of treatment and should not be forced to step back . 
mr. chairman , this debate should be about one of public lands and wildlife management and nothing more . 
over the years , we in congress and those in state governments have created a variety of methods to help control animal populations , whether it is placing a species under the protection of the endangered species act when the numbers are dwindling or allowing increasing hunting for various species when the numbers of the species are too great . 
in order to be good stewards of our public lands , these animals must be managed , and the only way to manage these herds is to take some of these animals off the range . 
the primary method for controlling horse populations has of course been adoption . 
according to epa administrator stephen johnson back in 2001 , epa `` believes that we have a more than sufficient database , through use of animal studies , to make licensing decisions that meet the standard , to protect the health of the public , without using human studies . '' 
mr. chairman , i will submit the remainder of my statement for the record , and i would ask that members of the house approve this amendment . 
i am very grateful to accept support from the other side of the aisle . 
right now , the united states environmental protection agency -- the agency in charge of protecting public health from environmental toxins -- is encouraging industry to use human beings as guinea pigs . 
the epa has chosen to go against the recommendation of the national academy of sciences and against the wishes of its own science advisory board and science advisory panel . 
not only are there no binding safeguards for epa conducted studies , but many of the outside studies which the epa accepts fail to meet minimum international standards established in the nuremberg code and in the helsinki declaration of the world medical association . 
our amendment is critical because , in the absence of binding standards at epa , the pesticides industry has increased its use of human testing studies and putting more humans at risk for what are frequently statistically invalid studies . 
the trend of using humans -- both children and adults -- as guinea pigs is a trend that needs to stop . 
the epa needs to have binding safeguards in place , and we need to have information about how a better understanding of how dangerous and toxic these pesticides are for our children . 
my colleagues , the solis-bishop amendment is supported by environmental and diverse religious organizations and among more than 80 , 000 others who have written to me saying they oppose the cheers study and support a moratorium on this type of testing . 
i urge you to support our amendment and prevent the unregulated and unethical testing of pesticides on humans . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from new york ( mr. bishop ) xz4000311 , the cosponsor of this amendment . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
i know many of my colleagues are hearing that this amendment will pose astronomical costs on local communities . 
it would not prevent utilities from blending under any of the current allowable legal circumstances . 
should we provide effective treatment for sewage , remove pollutants that poison drinking water sources , close beaches , contaminate shellfish , make people sick , and rob the water of oxygen the fish need to breathe ? 
or should we allow routine discharges of inadequately treated sewage virtually every time it rains ? 
congress needs to send a strong , clear message on behalf of our constituents . 
groups weighing in against epa 's sewage proposal american littoral society ; american public health association ; american shore and beach preservation assoc. ; american rivers ; children 's environmental health network ; citizens campaign for the environment ; clean ocean action ; clean water action ; coast alliance ; east coast shellfish growers association ; earthjustice ; us conference of catholic bishops ; environmental integrity project ; and coalition on the environment and jewish life . 
lake michigan federation ; league of conservation voters ; national fisheries management institute ; natural resources defense council ; new york rivers united ; pacific shellfish growers association ; physicians for social responsibility ; riverkeeper , inc. ; sierra club ; surfers ' environmental alliance ; surfrider foundation ; the ocean conservancy ; us pirg ; and us conference on catholic bishops . 
bypassing is allowed under the cso policy as part of a long-term plan to minimize sewer overflows and maximize treatment . 
the proposed policy would undercut those communities investing in long-term solutions that are protective of public health , the environment , and downstream economies . 
given the heavy load of viruses , parasites , bacteria , toxic chemicals , and other contaminants in sewage , it is critical that sewage treatment plants strive to achieve full treatment , not just discharge poorly treated sewage because it is cheaper to do so . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield 1 minute to the gentleman from florida ( mr. shaw ) xz4003690 , one of the cosponsors of this amendment . 
mr. chairman , i yield 1 1/2 minutes to the gentleman from new jersey ( mr. pallone ) xz4003080 , also a cosponsor of our amendment . 
mr. chairman , i thank the gentleman for his question , but our amendment does not intend to have any impact on any of the existing policies of epa regions and states that allow blending or on any clean water act permit that allows blending . 
mr. chairman , i yield 1 1/2 minutes to the gentleman from florida ( mr. miller ) xz4002791 , also a coauthor of this amendment . 
mr. chairman , i yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from illinois ( mr. kirk ) xz4002220 who has been very helpful on this amendment . 
can the chairman clarify that the intent of our amendment is to ensure that all epa regions and all the permits that are written will comply with the current clean water act rules and safeguards ? 
we accept his courtesy that he will accept our amendment and make it a part of the bill , and we look forward to working with him on this and other related matters . 
we can all have our differences as it relates to this issue , but as my colleagues have pointed out so appropriately , surreptitiously last year , snuck into the omnibus bill , is a piece of legislation that many of us have disagreement over . 
we all agree in this appropriation process that that is not the way congress ought to go about doing its business and , worse yet , that legislation overturned decades , indeed generations of congressional policy . 
now , we can argue the substance and the differences as to whether this is economically feasible and right , and whether this is humane or not , but the fact of the matter is it was surreptitiously snuck in , it ought not to have happened , i believe it violates policy for more than a generation and 30 to 40 years of congressional intent . 
mr. speaker , i ask unanimous consent that , during further consideration of h.r. 2361 in the committee of the whole pursuant to house resolution 287 , no further amendment to the bill may be offered except : pro forma amendments offered at any point in the reading by the chairman or ranking minority member on the committee on appropriations or their designees for the purpose of debate ; amendments printed in the record and numbered 3 , 6 , 8 , 11 , 13 , and 17 ; amendments printed in the record and numbered 1 , 4 , 5 , and 14 , which shall be debatable for 20 minutes ; an amendment by the gentleman from florida ( mr. hastings ) xz4001702 regarding environmental justice , which shall be debatable for 20 minutes ; an amendment by the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 regarding a $ 500 million increase in clean water state revolving fund and tax matters ; an amendment by the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 regarding a $ 100 million increase in clean water state revolving fund , which shall be debatable for 20 minutes ; an amendment by the gentleman from ohio ( mr. gillmor ) xz4001500 regarding state and tribal assistance grants ; an amendment by the gentleman from ohio ( mr. chabot ) xz4000710 or the gentleman from new jersey ( mr. andrews ) xz4000080 regarding the tongass national forest , which shall be debatable for 20 minutes ; an amendment by the gentleman from california ( mr. pombo ) xz4003220 regarding making spending on certain accounts subject to authorization ; an amendment by the gentlewoman from california ( ms. solis ) xz4003840 regarding intentional dosing ; an amendment by the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. obey ) xz4003000 to amendment no . 
each such amendment may be offered only by the member named in this request or a designee , or the member who caused it to be printed in the record or a designee , shall be considered as read , shall not be subject to amendment , except as specified , and except that the chairman and ranking minority member of the committee on appropriations and the subcommittee on interior , environment , and related agencies each may offer one pro forma amendment for the purpose of debate ; and shall not be subject to a demand for division of the question in the house or in the committee of the whole . 
mr. chairman , i move to strike the last word for the purposes of engaging in a colloquy with the gentleman from oklahoma ( mr. cole ) xz4000770 . 
mr. chairman , reclaiming my time , i understand the gentleman 's concerns and the unfortunate turn of events which caused this project to be delayed , and i will give the request of the gentleman from oklahoma ( mr. cole ) xz4000770 every possible consideration . 
mr. chairman , this issue is about the proper management of wildlife and public lands , and the committee on appropriations is in charge of trying to adequately fund the united states agencies . 
if we want to get into the question of whether or not the six cents is being paid for grazing land or anything else , you need to go to the authorizing committees and have a debate there and get it changed and so forth . 
mr. chairman , i yield 1 1/2 minutes to the gentleman from virginia ( mr. goodlatte ) xz4001540 , the distinguished chairman of committee on agriculture . 
the gentleman makes good points , and if he and i were the only two members of congress , we could probably sit down and come up with a tighter bill . 
because of that , we have cut many things and had a very difficult time in doing it . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
first i all i would like to read a letter from the assistant administrator of the environmental protection agency : `` dear chairman taylor : `` this is regarding the november 2003 draft blending policy which addresses the management of peak wet weather flows at municipal wastewater treatment facilities . 
the draft policy received extensive public comment and has been the subject of considerable ongoing discussion and debate , including being the focus of a recent hearing before the house subcommittee on water resources and environment . 
`` based on our review of all of the information received , we have no intention of finalizing the blending policy as proposed in november 2003 . 
mr. chairman , i yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from tennessee ( mr. duncan ) xz4001160 , the distinguished chairman of the subcommittee on water resources and environment . 
does the gentleman intend his amendment to have any impact on the policies of the epa regions and states that allow blending today and have issued permits allowing blending ? 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
this is a new area , a new part of the committee , and i would like to work with him as we go on with the bill toward conference . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i raise a point of order . 
this subcommittee has conducted extensive oversight using the inspector general and the government accountability office on the use of foreign travel on large conferences . 
accordingly , the committee rose ; and the speaker pro tempore ( mr. bass ) xz4000190 having assumed the chair , mr. hastings xz4001701 of washington , acting chairman of the committee of the whole house on the state of the union , reported that that committee , having had under consideration the bill ( h.r. 2361 ) making appropriations for the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies for the fiscal year ending september 30 , 2006 , and for other purposes , had directed him to report the bill back to the house with sundry amendments , with the recommendation that the amendments be agreed to and that the bill , as amended , do pass . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i ask unanimous consent to take from the speaker 's table the bill ( h.r. 2361 ) making appropriations for the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies for the fiscal year ending september 30 , 2006 , and for other purposes , with a senate amendment thereto , disagree to the senate amendment , and agree to the conference asked by the senate . 
mr. speaker , we will soon , i think , hear from our chairman of the subcommittee on military quality of life and veterans affairs , and related agencies , who will be speaking on this . 
i know that the error that was made is being taken care of in this legislation , in 2005 with $ 1.5 billion , and in 2006 with another $ 1.5 billion to make the entire $ 3 billion . 
some 68 percent of our veterans are from world war ii and korea , and we know when we go out on the plaza and see the monument to the world war ii veterans the sacrifices paid . 
so all of us want to provide the materials and the health care benefits for our veterans , and this amendment will be one of the steps in providing that . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i continue to reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from new york ( mr. walsh ) xz4004200 , chairman of the subcommittee on military quality of life and veterans affairs , and related agencies , a member of the party which , as we all know , has supported our veterans with increases every year . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , one of those barriers created by congress is bureaucratic red tape . 
my amendment goes to the heart of the problem centered around the unnecessary bureaucratic red tape . 
there are reporting rules promulgated by the epa that do nothing to protect the environment or the health and well-being of the citizens but cost american businesses hundreds of millions of dollars and thousands of jobs . 
one example of an unnecessary burden to the american small businesses is the epa 's toxic release inventory lead rule . 
in june , 2002 , a small business owner from baltimore , maryland testified before the regulatory reform and oversight subcommittee of the committee on small business on how this particular epa reporting rule causes harm to her business . 
nancy klinefelter is president of baltimore glassware decorators . 
her small business specializes in printing small quantities of custom glass and ceramic ware for special occasions . 
some of nancy 's work can even be found in the house gift shop and but because of the epa 's toxics release inventory lead rule , nancy 's business is forced to compile daily records on how much color is used for the mugs because the color contains a very small amount of lead . 
the answer is none of these . 
but all the american people get from these thousands of reports are estimates on how much lead is being consumed , but our air is not any cleaner . 
mr. chairman , with the hopes of working during the conference committee report , i intend to withdraw this amendment because i know it is subject to a point of order . 
i hope that we can work together with the gentleman from north carolina ( chairman taylor ) in the conference report to try to remove some of these unnecessary regulations . 
mr. chairman , i rise in opposition to this amendment , and i certainly am one who is not in favor of the slaughtering of wild horses , but i am also as a fiscal conservative who is concerned about what happens along the way , because we are looking at a price of somewhere on the order of $ 20 million a year to take care of the horses that nobody wants to adopt right now . 
that is 9 , 000 more than the carrying capacity of the land . 
this cage was put over this grass , and this is what the wild horses have done all around it , in terms of what happens in a fairly wet area . 
mr. speaker , i thank the chairman of the subcommittee on interior , environment , and related agencies of the committee on appropriations for calling for this motion to instruct conferees , and i rise in support of that motion , and i thank him for his hard work and support on this issue . 
there has been a number of different estimates as to what the actual needs of the veterans ' health administration are . 
this has all been done with the very best intention of providing the veterans administration and our veterans with the resources they need to meet the demands of the patients of the hospitals of the veterans administration . 
i think the secretary of veterans affairs , mr. nicholson , has an opportunity here as the new secretary . 
and he did not develop the budget ; the budget was developed by his predecessor with the advice and counsel of the office of management and budget . 
making sure that the people who provide congress with the cost estimates to tell us how we can best serve our veterans and keep our promises , those individuals need to be accountable to the secretary of the veterans administration . 
i might add we have had estimates from the veterans service organizations in each of the 6 years that i have been chairman responsible for the appropriations for veterans affairs . 
who is closer , we will see at the end of the process . 
but to cite the estimates this year , we need to reflect those against all of the preceding years , and i think by and large we have been on the money . 
by the way , we have increased this veterans administration budget each year in the neighborhood of double digits . 
no other budget within the federal government other than perhaps defense health has had those kinds of increases . 
the house has the power of the purse . 
we establish our priorities with that purse , and clearly the veterans administration is the priority of the house of representatives . 
mr. speaker , i just wanted to come to the floor and say the gentleman from washington is correct , all members of this body that i know , republicans and democrats , totally stand behind our veterans in giving them resources ; and that is the spirit with which we should approach this debate . 
but i have to tell members , one thing we forget around here , money is one piece of it , and accountability is another . 
some of these needs are not being met because they are not accountable . 
while i am not going to say what was said in the meeting of the steering committee , we hired the gentleman from indiana . 
for all of the right reasons , we hired the gentleman from indiana as the chairman of the committee on veterans ' affairs because of what he is doing and we need to do in terms of reforms and accountability at the va . 
let us follow through with a much more scrutinized process of accountability at the va . 
the chairman , the gentleman from new york ( mr. walsh ) xz4004200 , has done an outstanding job here , but surely the general public knows that members of congress support our veterans . 
all members of congress that i know support our veterans with the necessary funds . 
mr. chairman , i want to thank the gentleman for yielding me time very much ; and as he so aptly stated , we would not be here today except for the action of senator conrad burns in the last omnibus bill . 
but what this is really about , it is about the fact that we have 18 , 000 permits issued by the bureau of land management to ranchers in the west on 214 million acres of land , of which these ranchers are paying less than six cents per acre , per year . 
they are grazing over 8 or 9 million cows on this land , and we are talking about 31 , 000 wild mustangs and burros on this 214 million acres of land , and the ranchers do not want any wild mustangs or burros on this land . 
the question becomes , is it in the heritage of america to protect the few remaining wild mustangs and burros ? 
this amendment simply reverses the burns amendment and restores 37 years of public policy of protecting wild mustangs and burros . 
i can tell my colleagues i have a lot of cattle ranchers in my district in kentucky , and they are in tennessee and florida and texas and alabama and mississippi and louisiana and all around this country , and all of them pay a lot more than six cents per acre per year for these permits and for land . 
i might also add that these 18 , 000 permits of ranchers on these grazing lands in the west provide only 2 percent of the cows slaughtered in america , and we all like a good steak . 
they simply lost that protection because of a 4 , 000 page omnibus bill , and none of us was aware that the burns amendment was in it . 
i would remind people once again that these are public lands , 214 million acres of land . 
i think that there is plenty of money available . 
do we have to get to the point of rivers catching on fire again ? 
instead of turning back the clock and allowing sewage to flow freely in our rivers , we must increase our investment in upgrading wastewater treatment plants . 
ironically , this bill actually decreases the amount of federal funding for upgrading wastewater treatment plants . 
i urge all of my colleagues to join me in supporting this important amendment . 
mr. chairman , today i will vote in support of the amendment to the fy06 interior appropriations bill , offered by mr. rahall , that will prevent the secretary of the interior from expending funds to conduct sales of wild horses for the next fiscal year . 
that said , i am not categorically opposed to the sale of wild horses that live on federal lands and will seek to work with my colleagues to find a feasible solution to the federal land management challenges that underlie this issue . 
i strongly believe that we must provide the bureau of land management ( blm ) and all federal land management agencies the tools and the resources they need to conserve our precious public resources . 
i urge chairman pombo of the house committee on resources to hold hearings on this matter so that we can ascertain the status of the blm 's management authorities and resources . 
this summer , we know , as we approach the memorial day weekend , that additional hundreds of millions of americans and other visitors from throughout the world will continue to visit our national parks . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise tonight in strong support of the stupak amendment to the interior appropriations bill . 
it is a bad idea to permit our water to contain bacteria , viruses , parasites and intestinal worms capable of causing cholera , hepatitis , gastroenteritis and dysentery . 
i urge my colleagues to vote in favor of the amendment and ensure that the epa does not change its mind again and attempt to impose an imprudent sewage blending policy on america at some point in the future . 
i join with millions of american workers in saying no to this ill-conceived republican gift to the chinese government . 
this bill does nothing to address the growing unfair trade gap between china and the united states -- an imbalance purchased with china 's exploitation of political prisoners , oppressive jail-like working conditions , child labor , and suppression of basic freedoms . 
products made in china are cheap through the exploitation of the workforce . 
every time we shop , we are driving the nail further into the coffin of american manufacturing jobs . 
it does nothing to stop manipulation of currency to drive the united states further into a trade imbalance . 
this bill weakens the ability of the united states to apply sanctions against china for unfair trade practices . 
to help u.s. workers , farmers and businesses , and america 's long-term economic security , congress should take decisive action to bring about fair trade with china , instead of squandering this opportunity on a weak republican bill . 
this demonstrates the majority 's anti-worker agenda , that gives priority to chinese workers instead of american jobs . 
i rise in strong support of h.r. 3283 , the united states trade rights enforcement act . 
madam speaker , this bill goes to the heart of what we know is true in south carolina : china cheats . 
i thank president bush and the administration for stepping up their trade enforcements this year , and i especially commend them for expediting the implementation of the chinese textile safeguards to combat recent surges in exports to our market , but when it comes to china , more must be done . 
the united states trade rights enforcement act would provide the necessary tools to ensure china meets the trade obligations it has agreed to in order to become a member of the wto . 
this fails , as the gentleman from maryland ( mr. cardin ) xz4000640 said , as the gentleman from new jersey members of congress should be troubled that this bill has been introduced only in order to push through another trade priority . 
the gentleman from michigan ( mr. levin ) xz4002380 and the gentleman from maryland ( mr. cardin ) xz4000640 , members of the committee on ways and means , they want it to be , but it should have nothing to do with cafta . 
in the past 5 years , our government has refused to enforce domestic trade laws with regard to china , failed to take advantage of wto mechanisms to challenge china 's violations of international trade rules , balked at taking any concrete action on china 's manipulation of its currency ; what i hear from my manufacturers in akron , in lorain , and in elyria almost every week . 
instead of demanding action , it calls for more reports and more studies to tell us what we already know , that china is simply not playing fair . 
wasting that opportunity on this ineffective bill is a betrayal of america 's working families , of our small manufacturers , and of our long-term economic security . 
both of us have a strong desire to make sure that our antidumping laws and countervailing duty laws are enforced , particularly as it relates to our manufacturing industries . 
this bill purports to move forward and clarify the use of countervailing duty remedies against nonmarket economies , but it establishes two new loopholes that will make it difficult for industry to get relief . 
i would like to have a debate with the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 in regards to problems of double counting . 
we are limited to 40 minutes of debate . 
in regard to currency manipulation by china , an issue that many of us have talked about on this floor , what does this bill do , it sets up another study by the treasury department . 
in regard to the use of safeguards , no action in this bill . 
it would allow us to take action against chinese manipulation of currency . 
that is the legislation we should be able to consider , at least through amendment , but we can not because of the process that is being used here . 
it is already too difficult for industries to get the type of relief that they desire . 
i listened to the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 talk about this being the key trade vote of the year , and i think we should understand that the committee on rules is responsible to make sure that we have a fair and open debate by the manner in which they propose rules . 
mr. speaker , i understand that trade promotional authority gives the right of the administration to submit a trade-negotiated bill to the congress after consultation and after a mock markup on an up-or-down vote . 
i heard my colleagues talk about the manipulation of currency by china . 
no action is provided in this bill against china in regards to their infringement of intellectual property . 
my friends talk about the textile issues and the flooding of the market after the quotas were finished . 
nothing is done in this legislation for action against china in regards to the flooding of markets . 
that is the tradition of this body . 
madam speaker , before being elected to congress , i ran a manufacturing business that did a significant percentage of our sales outside the united states . 
i have seen the opportunities of free trade and the global marketplace , and i have seen how those opportunities can lead to jobs right here at home . 
the trade rights enforcement act offers a wide range of measures to ensure china abides by its international commitments . 
with 96 percent of the world 's consumers outside the united states , the global marketplace holds great promise . 
this bill is a strong tool to make sure china abides by the rules of free trade and puts u.s. businesses in a competitive position to take advantage of those opportunities . 
i encourage all of my colleagues to support the trade rights enforcement act . 
i understand while many of my colleagues on the other side , and some on our side , have difficulty with china , it is a very difficult policy . 
they are building su-30s , a russian fighter that destroys our best fighters 90 percent of the time , and the taiwan problem with the submarines and the different trade issues . 
it takes incrementalism , and it is going to take years of working what other presidents started to negotiate and to make this sound policy . 
i do not think they will ever be totally sound , but this is one step , not a magic bill , to make sure that some of those trade agreements are enforced . 
when i was in hanoi , to the minister i said , why will you not get involved with president clinton and trade in vietnam , and he pointed at thousands of bicycles outside his window and he said , congressman , i am a communist . 
he said , if those people have things , i will be out of office . 
mr. speaker , the argument from the other side of the aisle that this issue is somehow tied to cafta , i think , is particularly striking and particularly odd because the underlying bill that we are considering today should be on the consent calendar ; it should not be controversial with the bulk of people in this congress who care about the american economy . 
this bill is a comprehensive approach towards eliminating many of the inequities that exist in our trading relationships , particularly our bilateral u.s.-china trade relationship . 
it is clear that voting against this bill will send a very dangerous signal that this congress is willing to turn a blind eye to chinese complacency and we continue with the status quo of unfairness to our producers . 
mr. speaker , this bill is a strong , responsible , and comprehensive initiative that would close an existing loophole that bars the use of the countervailing duty law against nonmarket economies such as china . 
it is ridiculous that when we find subsidies in france , japan , brazil , or taiwan , we can use countervailing duties to strip the benefits of those subsidies , but we can not do so if we find the same subsidies in china or vietnam . 
it would increase funding for the united states trade representative to create more trade cops to improve enforcement of existing trade laws . 
by replacing current bonds that are used by new shippers in antidumping cases with cash deposits , we are dealing with one of the biggest loopholes . 
mr. speaker , passage of this legislation is essential for the economic future of the next generation , for the future of good-paying jobs in places like northwestern pennsylvania where we make things for a living . 
mr. speaker , i urge passage of this key legislation . 
this is the top trade vote of this year , and everyone will be counted on it . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from florida ( mr. shaw ) xz4003690 , the distinguished chairman of the subcommittee on trade . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to the gentleman from arizona ( mr. hayworth ) xz4001730 , a distinguished member of the committee on ways and means . 
first of all , the last speaker appears to have read the other party 's bill , not ours . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman from connecticut ( mrs. johnson ) xz4002051 , a distinguished member of the committee on ways and means . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to the gentleman from indiana ( mr. chocola ) xz4000720 , a distinguished member of the committee on ways and means and an authentic advocate of fair trade . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to the gentleman from new york ( mr. reynolds ) xz4003380 , a distinguished advocate of fair trade and a member of the subcommittee on trade . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to gentlewoman from pennsylvania ( ms. hart ) xz4001680 , a distinguished member of the committee on ways and means and a member of the executive committee of the congressional steel caucus . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to the distinguished gentleman from michigan ( mr. rogers ) xz4003421 , one of the key players in developing this legislation . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to the distinguished gentleman from south carolina ( mr. barrett ) xz4000160 , another strong advocate of fair trade for american workers and american farmers . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. murphy ) xz4002850 , a very distinguished advocate of fair trade . 
madam speaker , i yield 1 minute to the gentleman from indiana ( mr. souder ) xz4003850 , a very distinguished member of the steel caucus , an advocate of the cause of fair trade . 
madam speaker , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
madam speaker , i would like , in this closing minute , to cut through the fog of process arguments and weird alice in wonderland illusions to linkage to other trade agreements . 
i realize our friends on the other side of the aisle never engaged on the sos bill , the underlying core of this bill , nor cosponsored it . 
madam speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
i would urge everyone who in this chamber is as concerned as i am about the problems of china trade to vote for this rule and to vote for this bill . 
it got 240 votes yesterday , and i thank all of those involved who have made it possible . 
this , i believe , is the key trade vote of the year . 
yet yesterday , over 270 of our colleagues from the other side of the aisle voted `` no. '' let me tell the members what the significance was of their vote . 
and , finally , they voted against requiring the treasury to clarify its definition of currency manipulation in the context of the very modest change that the chinese have now put forward . 
it was intended as consensus legislation , and it certainly did not materialize out of nowhere because all of these components we have been familiar with for years . 
the truth was blurted out , may i tell the members , mr. speaker , today in the hill magazine in which it quoted a spokesman for the committee on ways and means democrats as saying : `` the minority 's near unified opposition to the bill stemmed as much from its role in the cafta battle as from the strength of its content. '' this is all about cynicism . 
this is all about politics being played by their side of the aisle . 
in other words , they are more worried about dealing with another trade agreement , dealing with five countries whose combined economy is smaller than that of the czech republic , than dealing with the real problem and the real threat in beijing . 
and i urge all of my colleagues , including those intrepid democrats who supported us on this bill yesterday , to join with us to get it through today ; and if they want to vote `` no , '' let them do it . 
the consideration of this bill is not a real attempt to react to chinese currency manipulation , trade barriers and state-sponsored subsidies . 
first , the bill limits our use of third-party data when investigating chinese subsidies in anti-dumping cases . 
the effect of this provision is to force us to use china 's own data in these cases , even though we 've learned time and again that china does not play fair in the global trade market . 
the bill also imposes extra burdens on the u.s. that raises serious issues with regard to both sovereignty and separation of powers . 
the bill would direct the commerce department to essentially pre-clear the application of u.s. law to ensure consistency with the wto . 
article i , section 8 of the u.s. constitution gives the congress -- not the executive branch -- the sole responsibility for the regulation of foreign commerce . 
this provision is a serious infringement on the power of the legislative branch and strips the congress of much , if not all , authority to deal with our country 's trade concerns with china . 
i rise in support of this bill , and i am mystified by the opposition on the other side of the aisle . 
meeting with businesses in my district , the three main complaints i have heard from my district regarding china have been piracy of product , the dumping of products on our market , and the currency pegging issue . 
madam speaker , perhaps it is the eternal lament of a minority within a legislative body to focus constantly on process and to share their frustrations with process . 
the 40th president of the united states , the late ronald wilson reagan , enshrined these three words as part of american policy : trust but verify . 
while we have seen all sorts of counterfeiting and theft of american intellectual property , this legislation takes steps to put that to a stop and to monitor the behavior . 
in my northern california congressional district , honey and honeybees play a critical role in pollinating many of our important export crops , including almonds . 
the so-called united states trade rights enforcement act would provide little to no remedy for those in my district who are deeply concerned about the ever growing trade deficit with the peoples republic of china due to its longstanding illegal policy of currency manipulation . 
however , this will not be the case today because of the procedures under which this bill was brought to the floor . 
we should be talking about the fact that china doubled its holding of u.s. debt between 2001 and 2004 . 
rather , today the house is considering h.r. 3283 because of an agreement reached , i presume to secure votes in favor of the seriously flawed dominican republic-central american free trade agreement , ( dr-cafta ) . 
i have heard from a number of constituents in my district who are deeply concerned about these issues . 
that is why i have cosponsored a number of other bills , such as the bipartisan the chinese currency act , h.r. 1498 , that will actually address china 's currency manipulation . 
madam speaker , i rise in strong support of h.r. 3283 . 
as one who advocated china 's entry into the wto , i am concerned and disappointed with china 's passage of a law on government procurement that incorporates strong preferences for domestic goods and services , fostering discrimination against , for example , software companies that have made a substantial commitment to the development of the chinese software industry . 
the combined effect of rampant software piracy and the proposed discriminatory government procurement regulations will create a nearly impenetrable barrier to u.s. software . 
madam speaker , i call on the chinese government to immediately enter into negotiations to accede to the agreement on government procurement of the wto as they committed to 3 years ago and to suspend the implementation of its law on government procurement . 
i urge my colleagues to vote overwhelmingly for this bill to send a very strong message to china on all the fronts the bill covers , not the least of which is government procurement . 
congress has often resorted to bills and memoranda of understanding concerning china . 
we can look at the history and the fact of the whole architecture of agreements that we have had with china , memoranda of understanding , concerns that members of congress from both sides of the aisle brought to this floor in order to try to manage united states trade with china . 
remember we were told that a memorandum of understanding on prison labor with china would remove their competitive advantage and restore balanced trade . 
remember the agreement to reaffirm the 1992 market access memorandum of understanding . 
you can pass all of these agreements you want . 
they are not going to amount to a hill of beans , because the fact of the matter is that the u.s. trade deficit in china will continue to grow , it will approach $ 200 billion , as long as the labor costs are cheaper . 
mr. speaker , i have had the opportunity tonight to listen to an hour that was presided over by my colleague on the committee on ways and means on the majority side , the gentleman from ohio ( mr. turner ) xz4004110 , and his fellow republicans and the statements of my colleagues on the democratic side . 
i very much disagree with the statements of the gentleman from ohio ( mr. turner ) xz4004110 and others , and i will get to that ; but at least we have been talking about issues . 
instead , we have learned about a number of deals that have been cut , one of them relating to dams and locks in return for a vote ; or if not in return , that being taken into account if the vote was cast . 
however , the truth of the matter is it would take action by this congress to do that , and not under fast track ; and also there would have to be agreement by the six dr-cafta countries . 
regarding a provision of concern to nicaragua , the administration has made some statement that nicaragua will more or less back off . 
there is nothing that this administration can really say that it can be assured of producing . 
oh , and then i guess it was today i read about discussions relating to agricultural shipments to cuba and some bargaining back and forth between some of the members of this congress and the administration regarding that . 
why are so many of us who have worked for expanded trade , who have helped to shape trade agreements opposed to this agreement ? 
one estimate is that in terms of gdp , the impact of cafta on the u.s. would be less than one-fifth of 1 percent . 
as to central american countries , there is evidence on all sides of the issue , including dislocation , that would occur . 
because here at cafta , globalization is at a crossroads , and that is why so many of us who have worked for expanded trade feel that we needed to take a hard look to judge whether this agreement was going to shape globalization so , as was put by president clinton some years ago , it would level up , not level down . 
i think the basic assumption of many proponents of cafta is , well , that does not really matter because trade is win-win ; that there is no possible loss ; that trade inevitably works out for everybody 's benefit . 
but for those of us who , i say , have worked and often worked very hard and successfully to shape expanded trade the right way , we believe this does it the wrong way ; that you need to shape trade agreements so it is not a race to the bottom . 
this is why central america , dominican republic and cafta , matter so much in terms of where trade is going . 
regarding the cafta countries , we are now talking about countries in a region that has , latin america , the worst income distribution of any region in the world . 
we are talking about within most of the countries immense maldistribution of income . 
there is a weak middle class in most of the countries . 
the headline was : `` in latin america , rich-poor chasm stifles growth , '' and i quote : `` because of an abundance of natural resources and a large indigenous population , latin american nations group up relying on raw materials , cheap manual labor to exploit them , and low government taxation . 
the system concentrated land ownership and wealth in a few hands , deprived governments of money to spend on education and other incentives , and essentially ordered the incentives for the elite to invest not in human capital or technology . 
latin america has also historically relied on monopolies and franchises , leaving few opportunities for entrepreneurs to advance through hard work and innovation. '' if you look at the history of trade agreements , there has been an effort to begin to have them relate to workers , to take into account the capital of workers as well as financial capital . 
we are not talking about the laws of the united states ; we are talking about the five core internationally recognized rights : no child labor , also no forced labor , no discrimination in the workplace , and also , so importantly , the rights of workers to associate and to organize . 
and what has happened is that this agreement is a step backwards from where we were going , a step backwards from jordan , a step backwards from the cambodia experiment , and also a step backwards from cbi and the second cbi , and what is called the `` generalized system of preferences. '' what this agreement says to a country when it comes to these basic rights of workers is , enforce your own laws , no matter what they are , no matter how bad they are . 
that standard is not used in any other part of the agreement , whether it is intellectual properties or investments or tariffs or subsidies . 
there is a recent report of ustr itself that it was required to give to congress . 
in these countries with immense poverty , in these countries with terrible maldistribution of income , in these countries with weak middle classes , if workers can not exercise their rights , they are going to remain poor . 
so i want to say a few more words about the implications of all this . 
i want to say to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle , what undermines stability and security is when people are impoverished , when people have no opportunity to climb up the ladder to the middle class . 
he concluded , `` the rest of latin america , from mexico to argentina , should take notice what is happening in venezuela and do something to improve their horrible distribution of wealth , otherwise soon there will be very many venezuelas in this poverty-ridden but resource-rich region. '' a major threat to security in central american countries is terrible income distribution . 
it is also the absence of strong middle classes and the presence of immense poverty . 
i read from a recent joint statement concerning the central american free trade agreement by the bishops ' secretariat of central america and the chairman of the domestic and international policy committees of the u.s. conference of catholic bishops . 
`` in light of a recent visit to washington , d.c. , 23-24 june , 2004 , by a delegation of six bishops representing the church in central america , the bishops ' secretariat of central america and the chairman of domestic and international policy committees of the united states conference of bishops wish to express with one voice our observations and concerns about the u.s.-central american free trade agreement. '' i quote from just one of their concerns . 
however , these jobs could principally be in assembly plants , maquilas , which mainly employ women , and which offer an unstable form of employment . 
without proper worker protections , we know from our own experience that this type of employment will not foster authentic human development. '' it is said by some defenders of this agreement that the problem is not in the laws , it is enforcement . 
first of all , that is not true about the laws . 
it cut moneys for the entity within the department of labor that deals with capacity-building of labor departments of other countries . 
it proposed cuts of 87 percent , and now it is being suggested that some of that money be put back . 
the record of this administration in terms of trying to bolster enforcement is abysmal . 
as i saw a few years ago in central america in the maquilas in three of the countries , there are no rights of workers on the ground in reality . 
they are working for 75 cents an hour , maybe a buck , mostly young women in the maquilas , many with children , sole supporter of their children . 
they went to nicaragua just recently and reported back , `` the salaries they receive , however , are covering fewer and fewer of their families ' basic needs . 
while the minimum salary in 2003 covered 49.2 percent of the basic food basket , 53 products identified as necessary to feed a family of four for a month , the minimum pay in 2005 is only covering 26 percent of these costs. '' so it is not a question of buying a cadillac , it is a question of buying food . 
mr. speaker , it is tragic that this administration has handled trade and shattered the bipartisan foundation for trade that is so necessary , that is so vital that a number of us have wanted to help reestablish in this country . 
now they are going to come here on this floor in just a few days , and what they are apparently going to try to do once again , instead of getting 250 to 300 votes on a truly bipartisan basis , they are going to essentially , headstrong , i think head-in-the-sand in terms of good trade policy , see if they can squeeze out a victory by one or two votes . 
it would be a defeat for the people of central america , the workers there , for their countries that so badly need the development of a middle class , people moving up the ladder . 
in closing , the gentleman from ohio ( mr. turner ) xz4004110 said at the very end that people supported morocco , people supported jordan , i did , because in those countries the rights , the internationally recognized rights of workers were in place , so enforce your own laws , there were laws to implement . 
there were conditions that were worthy of international respect . 
i am in favor of a cafta . 
so are others of my colleagues who have worked with me and who are leading this effort to make sure that cafta is defeated and we go back to the table and address these basic issues . 
people want a share of globalization . 
in that way we can proudly say we met the challenges of globalization in this case in the year 2005 . 
and i want to ask the chairman of the subcommittee , the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 , and the gentleman from california ( chairman thomas ) , why not put this bill not on suspension but regular order ? 
the rangel bill has a definition of currency manipulation and the ability under 301 to do something about it . 
this is another example of the abuse of power by this majority , stifling debate , trying to stuff things through on suspension , 40 minutes , no amendment . 
number two , as to the connection with cafta , the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 was not in favor of cafta until there was an agreement to bring up his bill , and then he said he was for cafta . 
i just saw an article from la nacion in costa rica about this alleged agreement on textiles , and here is a quote from the minister , the trade minister of costa rica . 
i am quoting : `` it is not true that those consultations , that negotiation , has occurred , and it is not at all true that we in costa rica and the rest of central america have sat down yet for that process of consultations. '' so we need a full airing of cafta and of the china bill . 
it is loaded with information , data just coming out of the ears of the treasury department . 
mr. speaker , yesterday , the house decided that this time it would not accept the practice of approving bills that materialize out of nowhere . 
so the house did not approve the two-thirds majority needed for passage under suspension of h.r. 3283 , a bill that has never gone before committee , never had a hearing , never had the benefit of expert testimony , never had a markup , and has never been open to amendment . 
last night the republican majority on the rules committee reported out a closed rule for h.r. 3283 , a closed rule that only allows for 1 hour of debate and no amendments ; well , except for the one amendment offered by the back room author of this bill in the first place , the gentleman from california ( mr. thomas ) xz4004010 , the distinguished chairman of the committee on ways and means . 
last night the committee on rules heard testimony on three amendments that would seriously address some of the major challenges facing u.s. trade with china and other nonmarket economy nations . 
then there was a amendment offered by the distinguished ranking member of the committee on ways and means , the gentleman from new york ( mr. rangel ) xz4003330 , a comprehensive amendment that addresses the real problems facing america in its trade with china , currency manipulation , export surges , barriers to u.s. export of goods and services , and the right of american private sector companies and workers to challenge china 's agricultural and manufacturing subsidies . 
each of these concrete proposals presented to the committee on rules last night deserve debate , and would significantly enhance the underlying do-nothing legislation . 
what is the majority afraid of , a straight up-or-down vote ? 
mr. speaker , i have sat in this chamber and heard over and over members on the other side of the aisle give 1-minute speeches demanding that the senate have up-or-down votes on judicial nominations . 
well , mr. speaker , if up-or-down votes are good for the senate , why are they not good for the house of representatives ? 
this house has had enough time this week to provide 40 minutes of debate each to the naming of half a dozen post offices , but we do not have enough time or interest to give the ryan-hunter-davis amendment 10 or 15 minutes , or the courtesy to give the ranking member of the committee on ways and means 10 or 15 minutes to offer a substitute amendment ? 
the chinese government must be laughing with glee at the republican leadership 's blatant abuse of power in their lock-step rejection of democratic debate . 
mr. speaker , standing up for american businesses and workers against america 's unfair trade practices should be one of our top trade priorities . 
the growth of china 's economy and its trade with the rest of the world is one of the most significant developments of the 21st century , and the bush administration and the republican leadership of this house have no effective policy for dealing with it . 
and china continues to engage in unfair trade practices , with billions lost to chinese piracy of u.s. intellectual property , chinese subsidies for its manufacturers , and chinese currency manipulation harming u.s. exports . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
in fact , if press reports are to be believed , this bill is being brought to the floor today , as ineffective as it is , so members on the other side of the aisle can have some cover to vote for cafta later on today . 
we have spent an entire week debating naming of post offices , but we do not have the time to have a serious debate on this . 
mr. speaker , i yield 5 minutes to the gentlewoman from new york ( ms. slaughter ) xz4003780 , the ranking member of the committee on rules . 
i share his frustration over the fact that many of us , we want to have more of a policy debate here . 
i think one of the reasons why they are not being made in order is because the leadership on your side believes that , in fact , these amendments will actually carry the day . 
i would say to the gentleman from florida that just to make it clear that one of the reasons why so many of us voted against this bill yesterday , one is because it does not have any teeth in it . 
we have had enough of that . 
but we also objected to the fact that this bill has never gone before a committee , never had a hearing , never had the benefit of expert testimony , never had a markup , has never been open to amendment . 
the gentleman from florida just commended the gentleman from pennsylvania for being the author of the bill . 
this is the bill that the gentleman from pennsylvania introduced , and then , mysteriously , this is the bill that came out of nowhere out of the committee on ways and means , no hearings , no markup , nothing . 
so we are talking about two different pieces of legislation . 
the gentleman from florida talks about democrats offering all kinds of amendments and discussing all kinds of things if we had an open rule . 
there are not thousands of amendments , three ; and we can not even discuss those . 
mr. speaker , i ask unanimous consent to print the text of the amendment immediately prior to the vote on the previous question . 
we all know that the purpose of this bill is not to have a serious debate over china policy . 
we know it is part of a desperate effort to win a few more votes for our trade agreement called dr-cafta that even supporters do not particularly like . 
that is three major pieces of legislation that have absolutely no opportunity for amendment or alternative points of view . 
we have a chance to change that right now by voting against the previous question and allowing the rangel substitute to be part of the legislation . 
my friends on the other side of the aisle supporting this bill rightly have stated that china is stealing our jobs , but this bill and cafta later is going to give our jobs away . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , earlier this evening we heard an hour debate of why congress and the american people should support cafta . 
and to the gentleman from michigan ( mr. levin ) xz4002380 i would like to say , as paul harvey would say , now the rest of the story . 
i want to thank my good friend , the gentleman from michigan ( mr. levin ) xz4002380 , a distinguished member of the committee on ways and means . 
and that is the way it is in a lot of mill towns in maine and all across the country . 
two days after i was sworn in as a member of congress in january of 2003 , i learned that the mill where i worked filed bankruptcy and was shutting its doors . 
the mill was closed largely due to the pressure created by unfair trade agreements , years of poorly thought-out trade deals that placed manufacturing industries at a huge disadvantage . 
i know firsthand , as many mainers do , that with these layoffs and closures , when these businesses go under because of unfair trade deals , so does the heart and souls of these communities . 
maine has lost 23 percent of our manufacturing base over the last 3 years alone . 
we are sick of watching our jobs get shipped overseas as our workers stand waving good-bye to them . 
it is time to get off the fast track of lost jobs and shattered dreams and on to the right track for fair trade agreements . 
more than 40 percent of the central american workers work for less than $ 2 a day . 
is this the way the people of the house should be acting ? 
is this in the best interest of our nation ? 
and why must these votes always happen in the dark of night ? 
they should ask themselves why under such cover of darkness should we be voting . 
americans should wonder what kind of witchcraft is being passed on the house floor as we consider cafta in the dead of night . 
the administration may want this deal to pass as quickly as possible before more opposition mounts , but the people who have suffered the most under our trade policies , including many of my neighbors , my coworkers and my family , and many of the good people in maine have earned the right to ask a simple question about what a new trade deal will mean to their families and get some real answers before we move forward . 
one of the things i hear a lot of people say is that large stable companies , like great northern was , where i worked for over 30 years , will never move overseas because it is too costly . 
they uplifted four of them and shipped them overseas . 
we heard earlier that in some of these cafta countries labor is less than $ 2 a day . 
it definitely will not benefit the united states of america . 
so i hope members on both sides of the aisle will take a good hard look at this trade policy because we can not sell-out the american workers . 
we must reverse these trade policies to once again put the united states of america on the path of growth . 
we must vote this cafta deal down , regardless of what time in the morning it comes up and regardless of how long the leadership holds the vote open . 
madam speaker , this is one of many bills we need to pass that deal with china and its continued policy of government support , pegging of its currency , not complying with trade laws . 
over 90 percent of their steel production comes from government-owned steel mills . 
their steel enjoys millions of dollars in government subsidies . 
the lack of intellectual property rights enforcement has resulted in epidemic levels of counterfeiting and piracy , causing serious harm to u.s. businesses . 
the implementation of questionable health standards affects what they will import from our agriculture . 
their policies mandate the purchase of chinese-owned software . 
consideration of this bill is an important part of what we need to be doing in an extensive selection of things to hit back on china . 
madam speaker , this legislation in front of us today as it relates to china is about one thing and one thing only : providing political cover for those who are reluctant to embrace cafta . 
we all know it is badly out of balance . 
i think that if they put a study in front of this house , we all ought to take a test on it in 2 years . 
when it is over , the professors will have their jobs , the trade lawyers will have their jobs , the editorial writers across the country will have their jobs ; but the men and women of organized labor who call this for what it is , they know that their jobs are at risk and they are opposed to this legislation . 
it does not require china to make meaningful changes to its policy of currency manipulation . 
we have a highly regarded regular order in this institution of the responsibilities of the committee on ways and means , the committee that many members of this institution desire to be on . 
you have hearings with a respected tradition in this house of representatives for the committee on ways and means . 
on both sides of the aisle , regardless of how trade bills , and this is trade day , i guess , on the floor of the house , regardless of how these bills go up or down , the american public knows who is exposing and who is extending and who is sending jobs overseas . 
the majority is using this fig leaf to cover the growing crisis of our trade relationship with china years after the horse is out of the barn . 
that it is even being considered on this floor to buy a few votes is an embarrassment to the house of representatives . 
it was $ 16 billion in the month of may alone . 
china is buying huge chunks of our nation 's growing debt . 
do you know how much debt china owns of ours ? 
people from both sides of the aisle have stated on the record what those abuses are . 
china continues its piracy of u.s. goods and products unabated . 
it is on the front page of the financial times and the wall street journal and the new york times . 
our nation 's manufacturing sector and the manufacturing capability throughout the world is being decimated by china 's use of these low-wage , no-regulation , nonmarket conditions . 
just today , 9 : 30 this morning , i can report to the congress of the united states in new jersey where the u.s. chamber of commerce has said , we are going to gain all of these jobs from this trade , we are going to gain all of these jobs from cafta . 
we did a survey of 180 small new jersey manufacturers . 
one-quarter of the entire sample told us that cafta would have a negative impact and lead to job losses , and they were willing to document it . 
we gave up article i , section 8 of the constitution , what we learn in the eighth grade : commerce belongs in the house of representatives , not on the president 's desk . 
and , second of all , the jobs that we have gained and the jobs that we have lost in our dealings with china make very interesting reading because we have lost high-wage jobs , and we have gained those jobs that pay far less . 
is n't it ironic that the proponents of `` free trade agreements '' like cafta are lining up squarely behind a bill like this that threatens a trade war with china , and at the least calls for the united states to initiate protectionist measures such as punitive tariffs against `` subsidized '' sectors of the chinese economy ? 
in reality , this bill , which appeared out of the blue on the house floor as a suspension bill , is part of a deal made with several members in return for a few votes on cafta . 
madam speaker , in addition to the irony of the protectionist flavor of this bill , let me say that we should be careful what we demand of the chinese government . 
as barron 's magazine pointed out recently , `` the japanese yen 's value has more than tripled since the breakdown of the bretton woods system , yet japan 's trade surplus remains huge . 
why should the unpegging of the chinese yuan have any greater impact ? 
`` as was pointed out in the wall street journal recently , with the yuan tied to several foreign currencies and the value of the dollar dropping , china could be less inclined to purchase dollars as a way of keeping the yuan down . 
does anyone want to guess what a sudden burst of the real estate bubble might mean for the shaky u.s. economy ? 
this is not an argument for the status quo , however , but rather an observation that there are often unforeseen consequences when we demand that foreign governments manipulate their currency to u.s. `` advantage. '' at the very least , american consumers will feel the strengthening of the yuan in the form of higher u.s. retail prices . 
this will disproportionately affect americans of lower incomes and , as a consequence , slow the economy and increase the hardship of those struggling to get by . 
it is an enormous privilege to serve on the ways and means committee , the committee of jurisdiction on trade matters . 
and during the period of time , the extended period of time this has been before the congress , it has given us a chance to look at this agreement pretty closely . 
i could spend my time tonight going into the whats , and the whereases and the what-fors , but i think it might be more fruitful to discuss this in the broader perspective , perspective first of all involving the track we are on relative to our trade agreements and our nation 's economy . 
then , secondly , a particular for instance in terms of where this is just more of the same , in terms of our loss of jobs , loss of economic opportunity here at home , and then finally to discuss the process , a process that i think raises serious questions about this trade agreement . 
we have been on a track of these trade deals , part of our participation in the global economy , for some years now . 
a recent commentator contrasted the approach taken by the united states with that of most other nations . 
it would just seem natural that as you stroll to the table and negotiate on behalf of the country you represent , that you advocate the nation 's interests , the nation 's jobs , the nation 's opportunity to sell more under these agreements . 
whether or not the interests of the multinational corporations have been advanced , the record is clear . 
the interest of the american worker and american opportunities have not been advanced . 
they tell us that our trade deficit , the amount we buy more than we sell , has never been greater in the history of our country . 
a friend of mine says there is not a trade deal ever negotiated that our silk-shirted ivy league-educated negotiators could not lose in half an hour . 
you certainly seem to think there might be truth in that when you look at the job loss that has just wrecked the economies of important parts of our country and led us to a net position , again , where we are buying more than we are selling to a dimension never before seen in the history of the united states . 
we had , growing up when i was a kid in school , we thought of ourselves as north dakota , bread basket to the world . 
we were very proud of the role we played in feeding the world . 
so let us just break out this agriculture component of our economy , take a look at that one . 
this year , 2005 , we are on the brink of importing more food than we export . 
the united states of america as a net food importer . 
clearly , this trade path that we are on is not working , and quite clearly cafta is more of the same . 
you know , we did not just learn of these places down there ; heck , we have been dealing with them for years and years and years . 
we have got about 94 percent of their wheat market , just to reference a commodity important in north dakota . 
these are long-established trading partners of the united states . 
but what is at issue is what we are going to do relative to opening the flood gates to their production , to the further displacement of our workers and our opportunities . 
of all of the commodities of agriculture , sugar is one of the higher value opportunities for the american farmer . 
and i represent people , third generation , fourth generation on the land , families that broke the prairie under the homestead act to begin their family 's farming experience and now making a go of it because they raise sugar beets in the red river valley . 
they had farmers not just raising the sugar beets , but when they had an opportunity , they acquired the processing neck of the business . 
now they control the marketing of it as well . 
this entire sugar industry from the red river valley sugar beet growers , from the workers in the plants today , to the sugar cane growers down in the south central and southeastern part of country , to the sugar beet growers out in the northwestern united states , significant areas of the country broadly affected by the threat to sugar . 
and i have seen the context of the cafta debate argument that what the united states needs is to resort to the global dump price at the end of domestic production of sugar in this country . 
when we decide are u.s. jobs worth fighting for , and the economic hopes and dreams of our families are what we ought to be representing ? 
and when it comes to sugar , believe you me , just look right across the opinion of the united sugar industry in this country . 
they believe it is the beginning of an end to domestic production of sugar in this country . 
what that means in the red river valley , we are talking fargo , grand forks , north dakota , not large places , is a direct and indirect economic impact of up to 2- to $ 3 billion , direct jobs 2 , 500 , indirect jobs maybe 30 , 000 in the area i represent . 
just another chapter in this global trade path we are on that has cost us so much and brought us the deepest deficit in the history of the country . 
it was negotiated in the spring of 2004 and concluded in late spring , early summer . 
if this was such a point of pride for our trade negotiators who brought this agreement home , why in the world did president bush not , as an achievement of his administration , put it front and center in the election campaign and run it up to congress for a vote ? 
why did they keep cafta like a dark family secret in the back room , out of the way , out of public view after the election ? 
i believe it is because they knew that the american people knew this was another raw deal , another trade deal that was a raw deal ; and , therefore , out of sight , out of mind . 
that is a pretty callous way , i think , to deal with something so important to the people of this country , but that is what they have done . 
because the american people understand that we have the deepest trade deficit in the history of the country . 
the house of representatives is a very imperfect place , but there is one thing that this place captures , and that is what the american people are thinking . 
and that is why , beginning this last week before the august recess , the majority , the majority who have dictated so much in terms of vote outcomes , did not know whether they have the votes to pass cafta . 
the members of this body know that cafta is a loser for the american people . 
one of the things each and every member represents is thousands and thousands of miles of roads back in their home districts . 
it is very important for each of us , republican and democrat alike , from every corner of the country , that we get our local needs attended to in the highway bill . 
this is no way for us to look at the future of u.s. trade . 
now we are hearing that it is going to be brought up for a vote late at night , in the early morning hours of the last minutes before we break for august recess . 
can you imagine this body acting any more disgracefully than to hold the debate , run it when people are not watching , try and break the arms required to pass the deal , and then leave town under cloak of darkness for a month to hope the heat cools down because we have passed another bad deal for the american people ? 
i would hope and i would urge those who really determine the outcome of this fight , those who tonight find themselves caught between standing for their constituents and what their constituents want and what their leadership tells them they have to do , i would urge them to do the thing that you could never lose by doing : stand with your constituents . 
and i believe we are in the minority in part because our leaders thought there were times when we had to vote for the majority instead of voting for those who sent us here . 
to the democrat and republican members who have already signaled that we are opposed to this deal , we are opposed to another sell-out of our economy , we are opposed to another rolling over of the concerns about american workers , i urge you to dig down and work harder than we have ever worked before . 
we are on the brink of winning this important vote . 
we go back to the table and we get a deal we can all be proud of , one that has some fundamental protections for our country . 
mr. speaker , by direction of the committee on rules , i call up house resolution 387 and ask for its immediate consideration . 
mr. speaker , for purposes of debate only , i yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from massachusetts ( mr. mcgovern ) xz4002630 , pending which i yield myself such time as i may consume . 
during consideration of this resolution , all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only . 
mr. speaker , house resolution 387 is a closed rule that provides 1 hour of debate in the house equally divided and controlled by the chairman and ranking minority member of the committee on ways and means . 
the rule waives all points of order against consideration of the bill and provides that the amendment in the nature of a substitute printed in the committee on rules report accompanying the resolution shall be considered as adopted . 
mr. speaker , i rise today in support of this rule and the underlying bill , h.r. 3283 , the united states trade rights enforcement act . 
the legislation passed the house of representatives yesterday by a majority vote of 240 to 186 , but did not garner the necessary two-thirds vote to pass under suspension of the rules . 
however , a report released in december of 2004 by the u.s. trade representative stated that while china has worked hard to comply with its wto commitments , they have not always been satisfactory . 
major areas of concern identified in the report included intellectual property rights , agricultural services , industrial policies , trading rights and distribution , and transparency of trade laws . 
specifically , the bill would establish a monitoring system to track china 's compliance with its trade obligations on intellectual property rights , market access for u.s. goods , services , and agriculture , and accounting of chinese subsidies so that we open it up and have that transparency that has been lacking to date . 
the bill also tightens the rules on antidumping duties by requiring cash deposits , and suspending for 3 years the availability of bonds for new shippers in antidumping cases in order to prevent those shippers from defaulting on their obligations . 
h.r. 3283 increases funding for the u.s. trade representative to improve the monitoring and enforcement of u.s. trade agreements , something that we hear about an awful lot on this floor , the lack of enforcement of prior trade agreements . 
the bill also authorizes funding for the u.s. international trade commission and requires the commission to conduct a comprehensive study on the sensitivity of u.s. trade and jobs to current policies . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
one of the items that the gentleman from massachusetts ( mr. mcgovern ) xz4002630 mentioned that i agree wholeheartedly with is the rise of china is one of the most significant developments of the 21st century , and that is why it is so critically important that we make sure that the trade agreements that exist between our country and theirs are enforced and are monitored . 
mr. speaker , i yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from michigan ( mr. rogers ) xz4003421 , a man from a heavy industry and manufacturing state who understands well the challenges imposed by the lack of enforcement of these agreements . 
mr. speaker , let me just take one moment to correct something that was said by my friend from massachusetts about this week being filled with renaming of post offices . 
there is the strong likelihood of at least a couple of appropriations conference reports ; the central american free trade agreement ; a highway conference report ; an energy conference report ; and a bill to get strict with china about enforcing our trade agreements . 
it garnered 240 votes , shy of two-thirds , but a clear majority , with 19 democrats also believing that it was important to enforce trade agreements with china . 
the gentleman on the other side of the aisle , for whom i have a great deal of respect , from new jersey represents a major industrial state , lots of manufacturers . 
application of u.s. countervailing duty law to exports from nonmarket economies is more than an empty gesture : $ 6 million per year in additional money to ustr beyond the president 's request , up to $ 45 million and earmarked for the general counsel , office of monitoring and compliance ; the suspension for 3 years of bonding authority ; increased teeth , increased enforcement , increased compliance to make the chinese follow the law and agreements that we have already signed and agreed to . 
mr. speaker , i yield 3 1/2 minutes to the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 , the sponsor of this legislation , and someone who has worked for years very diligently on all the issues relating to china . 
lauderdale , florida ( mr. shaw ) xz4003690 , the chairman of the trade subcommittee of the committee on ways and means . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , this is a huge week for the congress , a big week for the house of representatives . 
we are passing out major postal reform for the first time in years , a highway bill that has been in the making for over 2 congresses now , an energy conference report that has also been in the making for over 2 congresses now ; the opportunity to have at least one and perhaps as many as three appropriations conference reports behind us as we enter the august district work period ; and a central american free trade agreement , as well as a bill that gets tough with china , that finally holds our administration 's feet and the feet of , either party 's feet to the fire , and requires that they monitor and enforce the existing trade agreements that have been enacted by this congress . 
this bill has been called a smoke screen , it has been called a fig leaf , it has been called a number of demeaning terms . 
but at the end of the day , this is a real worthwhile enforcement tool that gives members the opportunity to show the folks back home where they are on fair level trade with china . 
the application of u.s. countervailing duty law on nonmarket economies is not an empty gesture . 
a system of comprehensive monitoring of chinese compliance with their trade obligations on intellectual property rights ; market access for our american goods , services , and agriculture ; an accounting of the chinese subsidies ; increased transparency so that we know what the government ownership is , we know what they are subsidizing , we know how much . 
it requires reporting by treasury to define the currency manipulation and to analyze the effect of what the chinese did with their new exchange rate mechanism this week . 
a $ 6 million a year increase above the president 's request , up to almost $ 45 million a year for the general counsel and an office of monitoring and compliance . 
that is a real meaningful resource to improve our ability to track the chinese subsidy and the potential manipulation of the global marketplace that is out of compliance with our trade agreements . 
the suspension for 3 years of the availability of bonds for new shippers in antidumping cases . 
and funding for the itc and an itc report on the sensitivity of u.s. trade and jobs to the currency policy , something that on a bipartisan basis we have heard a great deal of angst about from members of congress . 
that is a reflection of what is going on in the countryside that there are genuine fears out there about currency manipulation . 
we have debated it now , this is the second day , first on the suspension calendar , admittedly with the belief that it would garner two-thirds support from this chamber in the belief that everyone would share in the need to crack down on chinese abuse of trade agreements , that everyone would agree that we need to put as many tools in the tool kit as possible to enforce and monitor their compliance , to bring about that transparency so that the world community can see what is going on , can see where there are distortions , can see where there is manipulation ; and now it is back today for a straight up-or-down vote . 
the material previously referred to by mr. mcgovern xz4002630 is as follows : previous question for h. res. 387 h.r. 3283 -- united states trade rights enforcement act in the resolution strike `` and ( 2 ) '' and insert the following : `` ( 2 ) the amendment in the nature of a substitute printed in section 2 of this resolution if offered by representative rangel of new york or a designee , which shall be in order without intervention of any point of order or demand for division of the question , shall be considered as read , and shall be separately debatable for 60 minutes equally divided and controlled by the proponent and an opponent ; and ( 3 ) '' at the end of the resolution add the following new section : `` sec . 
2. the amendment by representative rangel referred to in section 1 is as follows : amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r. 3283 offered by mr. rangel xz4003330 of new york strike all after the enacting clause and insert the following : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; section 1. short title. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; this act may be cited as the `` fair trade with china act of 2005 '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; sec . 
2. findings. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; the congress finds as follows : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 1 ) the growth of the economy of the people 's republic of china is one of the most important developments of the 21st century. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 2 ) the bilateral trade relationship between the united states and china is heavily imbalanced and is undermining the long-term economic health of the united states. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 3 ) the united states trade deficit with china has doubled since 2000 , reaching $ 162 , 000 , 000 , 000 in 2004 , the largest bilateral trade deficit in the world. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 4 ) as a consequence of the trade deficit , the united states has had to borrow massive amounts of money from foreign governments. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 5 ) the united states has accumulated more debt to foreign countries since 2000 than in the first 220 years of the country 's history. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 6 ) china has become a major purchaser of united states treasury bonds , and united states indebtedness to the government of china has grown by more than $ 100 , 000 , 000 , 000 since 2000. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 7 ) the large amounts of united states dollars accumulated by the government of china contribute to china 's acquisitions of united states companies , such as the proposed acquisition of unocal corporation by the china national offshore oil corporation. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 8 ) china continues to violate many of the commitments it made when it joined the world trade organization in 2001. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 9 ) china 's inadequate enforcement of intellectual property rights is resulting in infringement levels of 90 percent or more for nearly all forms of intellectual property , and cost american companies more than $ 2 , 500 , 000 , 000 in lost sales in 2004. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 10 ) china 's industrial policies discriminate against foreign firms and products. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 11 ) the government of china continues to heavily subsidize its manufacturing sector through tax incentives , preferential access to credit and capital , subsidized utilities , and other measures. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 12 ) since 1994 , china has kept its currency pegged at approximately 8.3 renminbi to the united states dollar , which has caused the renminbi to become undervalued against the dollar by as much as 40 percent , harming exports of united states goods and services to china and providing an unfair advantage to chinese exports to the united states. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 13 ) current policies of the united states have failed to advance and protect the interests of american workers , farmers , and businesses in the united states-china trade relationship , failed to address effectively china 's unfair trade practices and market access barriers to goods and services and its poor record at protecting intellectual property rights , and failed to stem or reverse the unsustainable united states trade deficit with china . 
& lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 14 ) it is critical that the united states develop and implement a comprehensive and coherent set of policies to address china 's unfair trading practices and failure to abide by its commitments as a member of the world trade organization. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; sec . 
3. application of countervailing duties to nonmarket economy countries. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( a ) in general. -- section 701 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c . 
1671 ( a ) ( 1 ) ) is amended by inserting `` ( including a nonmarket economy country ) '' after `` country '' each place it appears. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( b ) effective date. -- the amendments made by subsection ( a ) apply to petitions filed under section 702 of the tariff act of 1930 on or after the date of the enactment of this act. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( c ) antidumping provisions not affected. -- the amendments made by subsection ( a ) shall not affect the status of a country as a nonmarket economy country for purposes of any matter relating to antidumping duties under the tariff act of 1930. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; sec . 
4. treatment of currency manipulation. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( a ) definition of unjustifiable acts , policies , and practices. -- section 301 ( d ) ( 4 ) ( b ) of the trade act of 1974 ( 19 u.s.c . 
2411 ( d ) ( 4 ) ( b ) ) is amended to read as follows : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( b ) ( i ) acts , policies , and practices that are unjustifiable include , but are not limited to , any act , policy , or practice described in subparagraph ( a ) which involves currency manipulation , or denies national or most-favored nation treatment or the right of establishment or protection of intellectual property rights. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( ii ) in this subparagraph , the term `currency manipulation ' means the protracted large-scale intervention by an authority to undervalue its currency in the exchange market that prevents effective balance of payments adjustment or gains an unfair competitive advantage over the united states. '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( b ) investigation into currency manipulation by the people 's republic of china. -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 1 ) investigation , determinations , actions. -- the united states trade representative shall -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( a ) conduct an investigation , under sections 302 and 303 of the trade act of 1974 , of the currency practices of the people 's republic of china ; & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( b ) make the applicable determinations under section 304 of that act pursuant to that investigation ; and & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( c ) implement any action , under section 305 of that act , in accordance with such determinations. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 2 ) initiation of investigation. -- the united states trade representative shall initiate the investigation required by paragraph ( 1 ) not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; sec . 
5. clarification of standard for presidential action on itc finding of market disruption. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( a ) amendments to standard for trade representative 's recommendation to the president. -- section 421 ( h ) ( 2 ) of the trade act of 1974 ( 19 u.s.c . 
2451 ( h ) ( 2 ) ) is amended -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 1 ) by striking `` ( 2 ) within '' and inserting `` ( 2 ) ( a ) within '' ; and & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 2 ) by adding at the end the following : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( b ) in making a recommendation to the president under subparagraph ( a ) , the trade representative shall consider the facts found , or conclusions drawn , by the commission as they are reported to the trade representative , and the trade representative may not conduct an additional review or reconsideration of the facts found or conclusions reached by the commission. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( c ) if the commission in its report makes an affirmative finding of market disruption , the trade representative shall apply a presumption in favor of relief to prevent or remedy the market disruption. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( d ) the following factors may not be used as the basis of a recommendation by the trade representative to recommend denying relief under this section : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( i ) the presence or absence ( whether actual or potential ) of third-country imports of the product under investigation. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( ii ) any results of the econometric model known as the commercial policy analysis system ( compas ) or equivalent model. '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( b ) amendments to standard for presidential action. -- section 421 ( k ) of the trade act of 1974 ( 19 u.s.c . 
2451 ( k ) ) is amended by adding at the end the following : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( 3 ) the president 's determination shall be based on the facts found , or conclusions drawn , by the commission as they are reported to the trade representative under subsection ( g ) . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( 4 ) if the commission in its report makes an affirmative finding of market disruption , the president shall apply a presumption in favor of relief to prevent or remedy the market disruption. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( 5 ) any determination by the president under paragraph ( 1 ) that providing import relief is not in the national economic interest of the united states may not be based on the following factors : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( a ) the presence or absence ( whether actual or potential ) of third-country imports of the product under investigation. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( b ) any results of the econometric model known as the commercial policy analysis system ( compas ) or equivalent model. '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; sec . 
6. identification of trade expansion priorities. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( a ) identification of trade expansion priorities. -- section 310 of the trade act of 1974 is amended to read as follows : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; '' sec . 
identification of trade expansion priorities. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( a ) identification. -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( 1 ) identification and report. -- within 30 days after the submission in each calendar year of the report required by section 181 ( b ) , the trade representative shall -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( a ) review united states trade expansion priorities ; & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( b ) identify priority foreign country practices , the elimination of which is likely to have the most significant potential to increase united states exports , either directly or through the establishment of a beneficial precedent ; and & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( c ) submit to the committee on finance of the senate and the committee on ways and means of the house of representatives and publish in the federal register a report on the priority foreign country practices so identified. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( 2 ) factors. -- in identifying priority foreign country practices under paragraph ( 1 ) , the trade representative shall take into account all relevant factors , including -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( a ) the major barriers and trade distorting practices described in the national trade estimate report required under section 181 ( b ) ; & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( b ) the trade agreements to which a foreign country is a party and its compliance with those agreements ; & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( c ) the medium- and long-term implications of foreign government procurement plans ; and & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( d ) the international competitive position and export potential of united states products and services. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( 3 ) contents of report. -- the trade representative may include in the report , if appropriate -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( a ) a description of foreign country practices that may in the future warrant identification as priority foreign country practices ; and & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( b ) a statement about other foreign country practices that were not identified because they are already being addressed by provisions of united states trade law , by existing bilateral trade agreements , or as part of trade negotiations with other countries , and because progress is being made toward the elimination of such practices. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( b ) initiation of consultations. -- by no later than the date that is 21 days after the date on which a report is submitted to the appropriate congressional committees under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) , the trade representative shall seek consultations with each foreign country identified in the report as engaging in priority foreign country practices for the purpose of reaching a satisfactory resolution of such priority practices. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( c ) initiation of investigation. -- if a satisfactory resolution of priority foreign country practices has not been reached under subsection ( b ) within 90 days after the date on which a report is submitted to the appropriate congressional committees under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) , the trade representative shall initiate under section 302 ( b ) ( 1 ) an investigation under this chapter with respect to such priority foreign country practices . 
`` ( d ) agreements for the elimination of barriers. -- in the consultations with a foreign country that the trade representative is required to request under section 303 ( a ) with respect to an investigation initiated by reason of subsection ( c ) , the trade representative shall seek to negotiate an agreement that provides for the elimination of the practices that are the subject of the investigation as quickly as possible or , if elimination of the practices is not feasible , an agreement that provides for compensatory trade benefits. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( e ) reports. -- the trade representative shall include in the semiannual report required by section 309 a report on the status of any investigations initiated pursuant to subsection ( c ) and , where appropriate , the extent to which such investigations have led to increased opportunities for the export of products and services of the united states. '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( b ) initial report on chinese practices. -- not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the united states trade representative shall identify , and report to the congress on , priority foreign trade practices of the people 's republic of china , in accordance with section 310 of the trade act of 1974 , as amended by subsection ( a ) of this section . 
( c ) conforming amendment. -- the item relating to section 310 in the table of contents of the trade act of 1974 is amended to read as follows : & lt ; p & gt ; `` sec..310..identification of trade expansion priorities. '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; sec . 
7. requirement of cash deposits. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; section 751 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c . 
( a ) investigation. -- the united states international trade commission shall conduct a study , under section 332 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c . 
1332 ) , regarding how the people 's republic of china uses government intervention to promote investment , employment , and exports . 
the study shall comprehensively catalog , and when possible quantify , the practices and policies that central , provincial , and local government bodies in the people 's republic of china use to support and to attempt to influence decisionmaking in china 's manufacturing enterprises and industries . 
chapters of this study shall include , but not be limited to , the following : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 1 ) privatization and private ownership. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 2 ) price coordination. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 3 ) targeting of industries . 
& lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 6 ) infrastructure development. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 7 ) taxation. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 8 ) restraints on imports and exports. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 9 ) research and development. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 10 ) worker training and retraining. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 11 ) rationalization and closure of uneconomic enterprises. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( b ) timing of reports on investigation. -- the congress requests that -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 1 ) not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this act , the international trade commission complete its investigation under subsection ( a ) and submit a report on the investigation to the committee on ways and means of the house of representatives and the committee on finance of the senate ; and & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 2 ) not later than 1 year after the report under paragraph ( 1 ) is submitted , and annually thereafter through 2016 , the international trade commission prepare and submit to the committees referred to in paragraph ( 1 ) an update of the report. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; sec . 
9. amendments relating to international financial policy. & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( a ) bilateral negotiations. -- section 3004 ( b ) of the exchange rates and international economic policy coordination act of 1988 ( 22 u.s.c . 
5304 ( b ) ) is amended in the second sentence by striking `` ( 1 ) have material global account surpluses ; and ( 2 ) '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( b ) definition of manipulation. -- section 3006 of the exchange rates and international economic policy coordination act of 1988 ( 22 u.s.c . 
5306 ) is amended by adding at the end the following : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( 3 ) manipulation of rate of exchange. -- a country shall be considered to be manipulating the rate of exchange between its currency and the united states dollar if there is a protracted large-scale intervention by an authority to undervalue its currency in the exchange market that prevents effective balance of payments adjustment or gains an unfair competitive advantage over the united states. '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( c ) report. -- section 3005 ( b ) of the exchange rates and international economic policy coordination act of 1988 ( 22 u.s.c . 
5305 ( b ) ) is amended -- & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 1 ) by striking `` and '' at the end of paragraph ( 7 ) ; & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 2 ) by striking the period at the end of paragraph ( 8 ) and inserting `` ; and '' ; and & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; ( 3 ) by adding at the end the following : & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; `` ( 9 ) a detailed explanation of the test the secretary uses to determine whether or not a country is manipulating the rate of exchange between that country 's currency and the dollar for purposes of preventing effective balance of payments adjustment or gaining an unfair competitive advantage over the united states. '' . & lt ; p & gt ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; & amp ; nbsp ; sec . 
withdrawal of normal trade relations treatment from the people 's republic of china . 
notwithstanding the provisions of title i of public law 106-286 , title iv of the trade act of 1974 , or any other provision of law , effective on the date of the enactment of this act , normal trade relations treatment shall not apply to the products of the people 's republic of china , and normal trade relations treatment may not thereafter be extended to the products of that country. & lt ; p & gt ; mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time , and i move the previous question on the resolution . 
as most of us know , this calendar is supposed to be used to expedite legislation that is not controversial and has no substantial opposition . 
one would hardly believe that this bill is on the calendar today for purposes of improving our trade relationship with the people 's republic of china . 
the chairman of the committee is right that the democrat side as well as working with the gentlewoman from connecticut ( mrs. johnson ) xz4002051 is very anxious to clear up the complexities that put the united states at a disadvantage as relates to dealing with the chinese government . 
but at the same time , we truly believe that these bills should not be the rangel bill with democrats or the english bill with republicans , but rather a bill that we can say as members of the committee on ways and means and as member of congress that we have taken it to the committees , we have had hearings , and we have come out with a position that you do not have to check the party to know whether it is right or whether it is wrong . 
we hope that a vote against this bill will send a message to democrats and republicans not to use the procedures of the house for political purposes ; to not put controversial bills on the suspension calendar , and to take them to the committee of jurisdiction where they belong so that they can be discussed , debated , and then brought to the floor in a bipartisan way so that we can look at it . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from maryland ( mr. cardin ) xz4000640 , the distinguished ranking member of the subcommittee on trade . 
mr. speaker , i yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from michigan ( mr. levin ) xz4002380 , a former ranking member of the subcommittee on trade of the committee on ways and means . 
i think this discussion , especially the opposition to the rangel bill by the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 , just shows the complexity as well as sincerity of those people that would like to put some checks on the conduct of the chinese trade people and i think emphasizes why this bill should not be on the suspension calendar . 
madam speaker , i yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from massachusetts ( mr. neal ) xz4002910 , a member of the committee on ways and means . 
madam speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
madam speaker , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
one of the major reasons why we are opposing this bill is because of the process . 
how can anyone perceive , as one of the members on the other side said , the most important trade legislation that we ever had will be put on just for 40 minutes debate ? 
all the members of the committee on ways and means feels the same way about trying to do something to contain the overreaching of china . 
what makes the other side believe that we democrats are not entitled to participate in the substantive nature of sensitive , complex legislation ? 
putting this on the suspension calendar , in my opinion , is an insult to members on both sides of the aisle and is an insult to those people who oversight what we do , because the suspension calendar means that we never thought that they would ever have a problem with it , and that is why we did not share what is in this bill . 
i also think that it is really unfair to have the members of congress to believe that this bill comes to the floor because of its importance and therefore has to be passed on the suspension calendar . 
we have plenty of time to work in the committee on ways and means in dealing with this so that we can be proud that we do not have a rangel bill or an english bill or a republican bill or a democratic bill . 
the flag is up , and we speak for the united states of america . 
what we should be doing is bringing these issues up in the committee that has jurisdiction , and we are so proud of it , and to make certain that the best we can is to have this as a bipartisan effort on both sides . 
so this is not the first time that the committees of jurisdiction have had to have members bypassed in terms of their input , bypassed in terms of the ability to have amendments , and bypassed in terms of saying that we have to find some way to find some bill that we can get bipartisanship on it . 
the vehicle to do this normally , from the record of the congress , are the suspension bills . 
whether it is currency manipulation or unfair subsidies , it is clear that our local employers have long had enough of the way china cheats on trade . 
as john hoskins of curtis screw in buffalo told me , they have `` never been afraid to compete globally. '' but this century-old manufacturer can only compete globally if they can compete fairly , and they note that some of their chinese competitors have much of the cost subsidized by the government . 
other costs of doing business. '' that is exactly what the chinese are doing today . 
the united states trade rights enforcement act will help combat illegal subsidies , provide additional funding for enforcement of trade laws , and make certain that our products and services have fair access to chinese markets , all critical aspects of our fight to ensure fair trade . 
i commend the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 and the gentleman from california ( chairman thomas ) for their hard work on this issue , and i urge my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to support this legislation . 
as a long-time champion of fair trade and a lead cosponsor of this legislation , i rise in strong support of the u.s. trade rights enforcement act . 
yet , in so many areas -- intellectual property rights , currency valuation , subsidies , trade barriers , you name it -- we see china failing to uphold its end of the bargain by ignoring international trade norms . 
the bill includes a variety of measures that will help bring an end to unfair trade practices abroad , and level the playing field for american companies and workers . 
it 's an important instrument for u.s. businesses trying to successfully combat illegal subsidies ; and it is a big reason why the national association of manufacturers ( nam ) has expressed its strong support for this measure . 
i recently hosted roundtables with manufacturers in my district ; and whether it 's currency manipulation or unfair subsidies , it 's clear that our local employers have long had enough of the way china cheats on trade . 
as john hoskins of curtis screw in buffalo told me , they 've `` never been afraid to compete globally. '' but this century-old manufacturer can only compete globally if they can compete fairly , and they note their chinese competitors have much of their costs subsidized by the government . 
this bill will help combat illegal subsidies , provide additional funding for enforcement of trade laws , and make certain that our products and services have fair access to chinese markets -- all critical aspects of our fight to ensure fair trade . 
i commend congressman english and chairman thomas for their hard work on this issue ; and i urge my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to support this bill . 
quickly , one of the things that my mother used to tell me is self-pity never solved one problem . 
there is a town in china , 80 percent of the parts , over 30 outlets , were counterfeit . 
mr. speaker , george washington in his farewell address warned of some of the problems that would be created with two strong party systems , and today i see it . 
it is unfortunate that my colleagues would spend so much of their time both yesterday and today debating about how they did not have time to debate the issue that is so important . 
given a level playing field , we will compete with any nation on the face of the earth . 
it is the engine of prosperity . 
it is amazing , and i want to talk just a minute about counterfeit goods , because in this bill for the first time we say you have to have a trade enforcement officer who gets up in the morning , and her whole job for the whole day is going to make sure that countries like china are living up to their wto and the world trade arrangements and agreements and the rule of law , the protection of intellectual property . 
the faa estimates that 2 percent of all airline parts are counterfeit . 
windshields in china , a group of auto companies went together and said you can not counterfeit these things , it puts americans at risk . 
mr. speaker , i urge my colleagues to get over the partisanship and get over the debate about debating , and for the first time send a very clear message that we will stand up for american workers , we will stand behind their products , stand for the future of trade and prosperity , and we will not allow countries like china to cheat our economy and steal our jobs . 
we are going to be basing our decisions on data that is gathered by the people 's republic of china . 
if china 's data says there is no subsidy , well , then , there is no subsidy , regardless of what the other comparable economies might say . 
we have millions of kids living in poverty . 
i rise today in strong support of this legislation . 
i first want to recognize the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 , a member of the committee on ways and means subcommittee on trade , for his persistence in bringing this bill to the house floor . 
as a member of the world trade organization , china has developed competitive domestic industries . 
however , as a world trade organization member , china must comply with international standards which promote fairness and respect for the rule of law . 
the legislation before us allows for a number of these checks . 
in this bill we create an extensive monitoring of the chinese market and its compliance on a range of issues , such as intellectual property enforcement , whether the currency mechanism is being implemented properly , market access to the united states goods , and its accountability of chinese subsidies . 
i am pleased to hear the news out of beijing and the chinese government that the chinese government has decided to float its currency against a basket of currencies and has appreciated the currency to a certain degree after 10 years . 
we must continue engaging the chinese government on the importance of a complete movement toward a managed float of its currency . 
i think the gentleman from florida ( mr. putnam ) xz4003280 just simply pointed out that the motion to recommit can certainly be with instructions to incorporate the amendments that the minority is speaking of . 
there was also a provision by the gentleman from michigan so this was a conglomeration of a number of bills brought together under the leadership of the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 and brought directly to the floor . 
let us talk about an open rule on a trade bill , something coming out of the committee on ways and means . 
there will be more china bashing than we can ever imagine , and that is not a proper way to bring any trade bill to the floor of the house of representatives . 
i do not recall any trade bill of this sort that has been brought directly to the house with an open rule so that every member can throw in everything and every political speech , as we are hearing today . 
that is a violation of the world trade organization . 
and is it not strange that we would be asked to violate the world trade organization provisions by unilateral sanctions , which are in violation of the world trade organization ? 
this is all being done under the rule of law . 
this bill addresses many of the problems , if not all of the problems , that we have heard come from the other side of the aisle . 
it does it in accordance with law , and it does stick to the principles of the world trade organization , which is something that we subscribe to . 
as chairman of the trade subcommittee , i am sure we are going to be talking about more things having to do with china , and the fact that the minority party does not get all that it wants out of this bill does not mean that they should trash it or that they should vote against it . 
mr. speaker , reclaiming my time , i would say to the gentleman that we do not waive any of those rights in the bill that is before the house today . 
mr. speaker , i rise in strong opposition to the rule before us this morning because , as was pointed out yesterday , the republican leadership , in a clear attempt to circumvent the democratic process , tried to sneak the united states trade rights enforcement act through the house under suspension of the house rules . 
the leadership once more has shut the door on the delivery of democracy by providing just 1 hour of debate on this measure . 
and more importantly , on a party-line vote , the republicans voted to prevent any amendment by any member of congress from even being considered on the house floor today which would strengthen this bill . 
that means they want all 435 members of the house to accept the leadership 's version of the bill ; no changes , no arguments , no additions , no recommendations for improvement , just yes or no . 
the question is what is the house leadership afraid of ? 
they do not want the membership of the body to have an opportunity to strengthen trade policies for american companies . 
this china trade bill is merely a public relations effort , and it is part of a last-ditch attempt to pick up votes for cafta which will come up later today , and nothing more . 
even though it is called the united states trade rights enforcement act , the bill provides little for those concerned about the ballooning trade deficit with the china and the destruction of u.s. jobs . 
it fails to include real solutions proposed by members on both sides of the aisle . 
but real american jobs are hanging in the balance , and a perfect example of this can be found in buffalo , new york . 
after 100 years of business , the buffalo color company , the last domestic producer of indigo dye used to make blue jeans , is in the final throes , to quote the vice president , of bankruptcy . 
buffalo color is the victim , and it has already been adjudicated , of illegal chinese dumping of indigo dye on the american market . 
we have called , we have written , we have issued press releases , but we can not get the bush commerce department to lift one finger to save an iconic american industry from annihilation at the hands of chinese price dumping , which is already illegal . 
as a result , the only remaining producer of the dye for blue jeans , a powerful american icon , will be driven into bankruptcy by illegal price dumping , and more american jobs will be lost . 
i hope the sad irony of this is not going to be lost on anybody here today , because buffalo color should be able to count on its federal government to provide protection from unfair trade practices . 
it has been alleged here on the house floor that this is a trade for cafta , to get some of our votes . 
i took it to the president , the vice president , our trade ambassador , the secretary of state , because we have had no action on china . 
and those critics of those of us who have been putting pressure on china in the last few weeks said we could never get them to reevaluate their currency . 
i rise in support of h.r. 3283 , the united states trade rights enforcement act . 
for too long , warnings of these businesses have been ignored . 
i applaud those at the united state trade representative office who have the daunting task of dealing with the chinese government , but unless talk is backed-up with action , it really does n't matter . 
often it seems that the piracy of music and movies is worth administration and congressional action but the piracy of manufactured goods or china 's deliberate undercutting of manufacturing through suspect trade policies does not warrant action . 
the hollowing out of american manufacturing does warrant action . 
because of chinese government intervention in the economy , chinese businesses are not subject to the same market forces as american businesses . 
although these things put american businesses , particularly manufacturers , at a disadvantage , the biggest distortion of the market is china 's currency manipulation . 
estimates of china 's currency manipulation were anywhere from 20-80 percent . 
while i applaud this movement on the part of the chinese , there is much more that needs to be done . 
i realize that the chinese can not adjust their currency overnight but i expect this latest devaluation to be the first of many . 
i also expect the bush administration and future administrations to keep pressuring china to restructure their financial sectors and currency schemes so that they better match th ose of the market-oriented world . 
countervailing duties are taxes assessed to counter the effects of subsidies provided by foreign governments to goods exported to the united states . 
subsidies cause the price of such merchandise to become artificially low , which may cause economic `` injury '' to u.s. manufacturers . 
one thing is sure , the artificially low price of chinese merchandise has caused injury to american manufacturers . 
unfortunately , the most recent interpretation of american trade laws does not allow cvds to be applied to non-market economies . 
i am one of many members that withheld support for cafta in exchange for concrete action on china . 
that may be , but if manufacturers in my district are put out of business because of unfair competition from china , whether or not they have access to markets in central america will be irrelevant because they will be out business . 
i urge all of my colleagues in the house and the senate to vote for this necessary tool against unfair trade practices . 
but the fact is , with all due respect , the most powerful lobby , or at least one of the most powerful lobbies , in this congress is the china lobby , with quotes around that , those people who believe that trade with china and expanding trade with china is absolutely essential . 
some people have alleged that the only reason this bill is coming up is because of cafta . 
it is hard to get different bills up unless you can use your leverage at different times when the majority of congress , of the leadership , president clinton when he was president , president bush when he was president , the leadership of both political parties , has not been willing to aggressively confront china . 
if you do not have any data like this bill is asking us to collect , when i went in and worked with the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 and others to try to put this bill together in the beginning , the main problem is that most of the proposals on the table are not workable . 
this bill incorporates the english bill that i was an original cosponsor of and helped in drafting with the modifications of the ways and means committee , with the numbers collection , so that we can have the first steps to be able to not just be a paper dragon . 
all the rhetoric of congress got nothing , but when we leveraged on cafta , which , quite frankly , is a little tiny peanut compared to a great big elephant when we are talking about china , very important in central america , very important to those democracies , important to a few people in our country and certain trading agreements , but just a little tiny trade thing , and china is a huge trade thing , but they will not talk to me or others about china , either party , unless you leverage your vote when it becomes a critical time . 
the pressure was so great out of congress on the markets and manipulation that they made a small concession . 
the plain truth is that for all my criticism of china , they have been helping to prop up our currency . 
as arab countries back out of our currency and move to the euro because of our support for israel and other elements in the middle east , china has helped prop it up . 
american industry can not compete with environmental standards , clean air , clean water , parental leave , the minimum wage , ada and all this type of stuff , then add to that a currency manipulation of 20 to 80 percent . 
it is not a matter of putting tariffs up and us asking for trade advantages . 
the department of commerce is required to use chinese data to measure the size of the subsidy , `` where practicable , '' but use of chinese cost and pricing data is not always practicable , so similar data must be drawn from a comparable country . 
as originally drawn , this bill dropped the key phrase , `` where practicable. '' it restricted the ability of the commerce department to measure subsidies in china and other non-market economies . 
due to a barrage of complaints from u.s. industry , that phrase was added back at the last moment , before this bill was brought to the floor . 
first of all , this bill requires the department of commerce to ensure that there is no `` double-counting '' of countervailing duties and anti-dumping duties . 
current law only requires that there be no double-counting of export subsidies , but makes no provision with respect to antidumping duties . 
commerce has called this change `` wholly inappropriate. '' these are the words of the commerce department : `` the proposed change would put china into a special category distinct from all other countries when subject to concurrent anti-dumping and countervailing duty investigations. '' according to the department of commerce , this restriction `` would raise complex methodological questions , the costs of which may far outweigh any purported equity gains of any such adjustment. '' secondly , this bill gives the wto dispute settlement body special influence over u.s. law . 
this bill would require the commerce department to ensure that our application of countervailing duty law to non-market economies is consistent with our international obligations . 
there is no guarantee how the wto would rule if this aspect of this law were brought before it . 
this bill purports to address china 's lax enforcement of its international trade obligations . 
i am a cosponsor of h.r. 1498 , the chinese currency act , which would allow the administration to impose countervailing duties due to china 's continued currency manipulation . 
the bill has 110 bipartisan cosponsors and provides real enforcement mechanisms , instead of the studies and redefinitions offered by h.r. 3283 . 
the united states trade rights enforcement act , as amended , is a compendium of a number of positions that have been expressed in a bipartisan way by members of this house in regard to some of our trading partners . 
the provisions to assist us in determining how you examine a nonmarket economy and determine whether or not it is carrying out practices that are in violation of the wto is applied to any country with a nonmarket economy . 
it is true that there are monitoring provisions dealing with agreements that china has voluntarily laid on the table ; for example , moving away from the government of china using counterfeit software and , therefore , protecting intellectual property rights , and china assigned itself the date of the end of calendar year 2005 . 
the bill is very timely because it includes another monitoring process just recently announced by the government of china dealing with its currency , its desire to unpeg its currency to the u.s. dollar and have it move modestly against a basket of world currencies . 
i am pleased to say that the gentleman from new york ( mr. rangel ) xz4003330 and the gentlewoman from connecticut ( mrs. johnson ) xz4002051 have examined and offered a resolution on the government procurement agreement of the world trade organization urging china to fully participate . 
this bill is designed to meet a number of members ' particular concerns focused on world trade , not just china . 
yes , it includes the office of china affairs , but i do want members to know it also includes the office of japan , korea , and asian pacific affairs because there are several provisions in here monitoring , frankly , the government of japan based upon its unfair trade practices , most focused on the use of so-called sanitary and phytosanitary measures as , in fact , nontariff trade barriers . 
so this is a compendium of concerns presented at a time that the trade issues will be in front of us this week , and leadership felt , and i agree as well , that this measure allows us to focus beyond this hemisphere , in fact , at major trading partners and behavior that we have seen not just in terms of providing tools to enforce u.s. trade rights , but to monitor personal individual and voluntary commitments made by governments as well . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
some of the other measures , and we saw that in the hearings that the committee on ways and means has had over china and other trade concerns , this bill is backed by hearings notwithstanding what the gentleman from new york ( mr. rangel ) xz4003330 said . 
but most of the other pieces of legislation in fact violate the very wto rules that we desire china and other nations to follow . 
mr. speaker , i ask unanimous consent to yield the remainder of my time to the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 who has been instrumental in producing this bill , and that the gentleman from pennsylvania ( mr. english ) xz4001230 may control the remainder of the time . 
further , by placing this legislation on the suspension calendar , which is reserved for non-controversial legislation , the republican leadership has refused to offer a full debate to members to consider alternative plans to strengthen enforcement of our trade policies and hold countries accountable for their trade practices . 
this procedure makes it clear that real intent here is not so much to address our trade problems -- it is more about politics and winning extra votes for passage of cafta later this week . 
mr. chairman , i rise today in support of h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act of 2005 . 
the goal of the head start program is to give at-risk children all across our nation a fair chance at succeeding in the educational system . 
latino children make up more than one-third , 34 percent , of all those eligible for the program . 
in my home state of california , 65.8 percent , which is almost two-thirds , of those enrolled in the head start program are latino . 
as the hispanic population experiences rapid growth , head start services must be strengthened to reflect the unique needs of latino families . 
head start 's ability to improve the educational skills and opportunities of latino children will be an important component of america 's future success . 
this bill improves the program in several key ways : it increases funding for underserved children : for the children of migrant and seasonal workers , it will allow approximately 10 , 000 more children to leave the agricultural fields and enter the classroom ; it expands the native america head start programs ; and it also works towards ensuring that parents can get information in their native language , when possible . 
this bill was passed unanimously out of the committee on education and the workforce in may . 
that kind of partisan politics has no place in a bill that is about increasing educational opportunities for our children . 
many of our latino parents and children already face a number of barriers in accessing the head start program . 
it would place tens of thousands of already at-risk children in danger of losing their head start teachers . 
and in doing so , it would block countless low-income and minority parents from climbing the ladder out of poverty . 
we should not make it more difficult to participate in a program that enables thousands of parents to make the life-changing transition from being a parent volunteer to being a trained and paid head start teacher . 
this amendment is inconsistent with american values of tolerance and respect for all religions . 
instead of trying to tack on a partisan amendment , we should pass a bill that maintains head start 's high standards and allows head start centers to hire the most qualified teachers . 
i rise in strong support of h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act of 2005 . 
as a former head start volunteer , i know firsthand the tremendous benefits this program has delivered for children , but never did i think that summer , the first year of head start 's existence , that i would one day be a part of the congress in reauthorizing head start . 
mr. chairman , the committee on education and the workforce learned that more head start-eligible children ages 3 to 5 are participating in state prekindergarten programs because there are more of them , leaving some of the head start programs with unused slots . 
but because of the high need for infant child care , early head start programs , the early ones , serving children from birth through age 3 , maintain long waiting lists . 
as a mother and grandmother , i can tell you firsthand that the first years of a child 's life are crucial to his or her development . 
i would like to thank the chairman of the committee , the gentleman from ohio ( mr. boehner ) xz4000360 ; the chairman of the subcommittee , the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 ; and the members of the committee for supporting this amendment in the full committee markup . 
mr. speaker , by direction of the committee on rules , i call up house resolution 455 and ask for its immediate consideration . 
mr. speaker , for the purpose of debate only , i yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from florida ( mr. hastings ) xz4001701 , pending which i yield myself such time as i may consume . 
during consideration of this resolution , all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only . 
the resolution before us provides for a structured rule for the consideration of h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act of 2005 , and makes a good number of important amendments in order and will provide for a full and wide-ranging debate on all the aspects of the head start program . 
mr. speaker , h.r. 2123 was passed out of the committee on education and the workforce unanimously . 
at the same time , the bill incorporates a number of wide-ranging and widely supported commonsense improvements to head start which will improve teacher education standards , increase the accountability for the use of funds , and enhance outreach to the most deserving students . 
instead , the rule does provide for this and other items to be debated and voted upon separately so that the house may work its will and the final outcome will reflect the views of the majority of the members , which is an understandable approach . 
i do not want to be a little bit parochial here , but being well acquainted with those involved in head start in my particular area , they do a great job and i am very proud of my association with them . 
but in each of these situations , the program still could be better . 
they insist that any new money above and beyond the funding skills , 60 percent of that be tendered only to teacher quality , which is where that emphasis needs to be . 
the head start program is administered by the department of health and human services and is accomplished through grants that directly go to applying entities . 
the head start program has been largely successful because the head start program is locally designed and they are administered by a network of 1 , 600 public and private nonprofit and forprofit agencies at the local level . 
because of this local emphasis , educators can tailor their approaches to fill the specific needs of the populations they serve , instead of a one-size-fits-all approach that too many other federal programs , including other federal education programs , have . 
especially important is this particular thing , that in the text of this particular bill it puts a greater emphasis on tying head start programs to a state 's curricular standards . 
this is for the benefit of the kids coming through the system . 
of increasing specific importance to me is the local tie-in that is demanded by this particular bill . 
the gao was critical of some financial management standards of the head start program . 
to solve that without losing the purpose of head start , which is to help disadvantaged kids prepare for school , they have increased the element of competition within the program . 
the competition that will be new in this particular program will drive improvements in head start ; at the same time it will meet the needs of a recommended financial management that the gao suggested . 
there are also within this guarantees that there is a guaranteed share of the money that will go to native american programs , migrant and seasonal workers , the most disadvantaged of the groups that head start is trying to help and assist , who will never be placed at a disadvantage in the overall process . 
in addition to that , this bill removes certain flawed techniques of evaluation that have been standardly used by the head start program and replaces them with something that is more scientifically based . 
in addition to a manager 's amendment , the chairman of the committee who recommended this bill recommended four amendments , two by republicans and two by democrats . 
i commend the gentleman from ohio ( mr. boehner ) xz4000360 and the sponsor of this legislation , the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 , for their hard work in placing this bill before the house ; and i urge all of my colleagues to support this rule . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
if i could just make a note of the amendments that were not made in order , of the 12 , four were defeated in committee . 
one was combined and given preference to a similar bill , and one was a policy issue that we simply said would not be there because it would take money away from the training of teachers , in contradiction with what the bill was trying to do . 
mr. speaker , it is my pleasure to yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from ohio ( mr. boehner ) xz4000360 , the chairman of the committee on education and the workforce . 
mr. speaker , i appreciate the comments of the gentlewoman from minnesota . 
it was one of the concepts that we thought was not necessary to replow all old ground over and over again , and that is probably one of the reasons why this particular amendment was not placed in order by the committee on rules . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
if this rule is passed , there will be a 30-minute time and place to discuss the details of the specific amendment which has been referred to several times . 
i hope saying there is a time and place for that , and i apologize since i am paraphrasing from a faith-based piece of literature , and if it would be more profitable i could say i am paraphrasing from a popular song of the counterculture of the 1960s , and i am sure that would absolve anyone with 9th and 10th circuit concerns . 
since the minority has jumped over that line and tried to go into the amendment itself , let me say a couple of things about it , and i appreciate the comments from the gentleman from texas . 
i served as a missionary from my church for a couple of years . 
although when you put the discrimination , if the gentleman put my religion first instead of the end of the line , it would have been nicer . 
i also was a school teacher , and i realize in the article the gentleman quoted from the constitution i was an officer of public office and trust . 
what we are talking about here is simply whether a church who is organized should be able to hire members of their church to work for their church . 
should the state be able to compel a church to hire somebody outside of that church to work for that church : that is the question . 
the entire purpose of this act is to try and focus academic efforts to try and make sure that kids are prepared to enter the school system , and are there groups that can help kids . 
we should not put some kind of artificial barrier in front of groups that can help kids from actually doing that , especially when they are functioning under the rules that we have established and have been upheld by the courts . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
i do disagree here about the concept of time and place and when this amendment should be discussed . 
mr. speaker , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 , the sponsor of this piece of legislation ; not the rule , but the sponsor of the legislation . 
it provides for competition to improve the quality and to meet questions of mismanagement of financial abilities . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time , and i move the previous question on the resolution . 
i am happy to see some improvement offered in the school readiness act of 2005 , such as abandoning block-granting , increasing accountability on academic performance and content , and teacher quality . 
unfortunately , this bill falls short of the expectations set by my local community and i can not support it . 
in oregon , only 58 percent of the eligible children are being served . 
instead of focusing on getting more eligible children into the program , the republican leadership is once again attempting to repeal civil rights protections by introducing an amendment permitting religious organizations to use federal funds to discriminate in hiring and firing decisions . 
mr. speaker , i want to thank my colleague from utah for yielding time , and mr. speaker , today we have an opportunity to act on behalf of the nearly 1 million disadvantaged children in the united states who participate in the head start early childhood education program every year . 
if we do not address this readiness gap , head start children will continue to enter school without the level of preparedness that we know that they need . 
another problem we have witnessed is an alarming number of financial abuses in various head start programs , showing that taxpayer dollars are not always being used to serve disadvantaged children and their families . 
these protections are a direct response to the reports of chronic financial abuse that have surfaced in recent years . 
another important component of this bill is that it will create greater competition to ensure federal dollars are being spent wisely . 
this commonsense reform will fundamentally shift expectations in the head start program by demanding nothing less than the highest quality programs , and for the first time ever , programs that fail to meet expectations will face the possibility of losing federal funding . 
later today we will debate an important amendment offered by the gentleman from florida ( mr. mica ) xz4002730 , which has been a priority of mine , that will complement our efforts to introduce greater competition into the program . 
the amendment would help implement a reform initiative at the department of health and human services designed to address the internal weaknesses in the head start management structure and improve its overall effectiveness , and i would urge my colleagues to support it . 
lastly , i would like to note another critical issue we will consider today in the aftermath of hurricane katrina . 
president bush has called them the armies of compassion , and these armies are always on the front lines when our nation needs them most . 
too often , the federal government has ignored or impeded the efforts of faith-based organizations willing to lend a helping hand in providing critical services to the neediest in our communities . 
the boustany amendment will protect the rights of faith-based groups to fully participate in serving head start children without relinquishing their religious identities . 
the 1964 civil rights act made clear that when faith-based groups hire employees on a religious basis , it is an exercise of the group 's civil liberties . 
this amendment deserves the support of all of our colleagues . 
i think the rule before us today is a fair rule that makes in order an array of democrat and republican amendments , and i would urge my colleagues to support it . 
mr. chairman , i rise today in support of this bill to reform and reauthorize the head start early childhood program . 
i want to commend the chairman of the subcommittee on education reform , the author of this bill and my good friend , the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 . 
this bill will strengthen school readiness and increase the role of all 50 states and local communities in head start . 
it will protect children and taxpayers against the abuse and mismanagement of head start funds , and it will make head start more transparent and more accountable to parents and taxpayers . 
but there is evidence that some head start centers could be doing an even better job of providing preschoolers with the academic foundation they need in order to succeed in school . 
this bill will strengthen head start 's academic standards by emphasizing cognitive development and the results of scientifically based research and topics critical to children 's school readiness . 
it will also improve teacher quality by ensuring a greater number of head start teachers have degrees and are adequately trained in early childhood development , particularly in teaching the fundamentals . 
the bill also addresses weaknesses in the head start financial oversight structure that have allowed the mismanagement and outright abuse of federal funds meant for disadvantaged children . 
local media outlets across the nation have documented more than a dozen instances of financial mismanagement involving millions of dollars and thousands of children . 
this lack of program integrity and financial accountability is unacceptable . 
unfortunately , there is currently no system in place to assure parents and taxpayers that these types of abuses will be prevented . 
and it is unfair to the many high-quality , hard-working , law abiding people who operate head start centers across the country who should not be associated with the deeds of these bad actors . 
the vast majority of those in head start are honest individuals dedicated to making sure the poorest of our nation 's children have a chance to succeed . 
i would like to address one more issue that is the subject of great debate today . 
in numerous federal programs across the country , faith-based institutions that want to lend a helping hand and providing critical social services are allowed to do so without changing the fundamental character of their organization . 
today i urge members to support an amendment that i will be offering on behalf of the gentleman from louisiana ( mr. boustany ) xz4006360 to restore the hiring protections in the head start program so that faith-based institutions can participate fully without giving up their mission and character that make them such an effective partner for programs like head start that serve those in need . 
once again , i would like to thank the author of the bill , the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 , for his hard work on behalf of the nearly one million children served each year by the head start program . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from florida ( mr. putnam ) xz4003280 for purposes of a colloquy . 
many of the accountability principles that were outlined in the gentleman 's bill , h.r. 778 , have been included in the school readiness act , and these reforms i think are critical if we are going to ensure grantees are effectively managing taxpayer dollars and also to ensure that funding is targeted most effectively for purposes that support the program 's goal of preparing kids for school . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i am pleased to yield 6 minutes to the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 , the author of the bill and the chairman of the subcommittee on education reform . 
there has been a great deal of effort been put into this bill on a bipartisan basis , and it has been pointed out it came out of committee 48-0 . 
one of the reasons that there is some concern is that members on both sides of a question over the role of faith-based organizations , there are meaningful differences on both sides , but we have nothing to fear in allowing the house to work its will . 
i respect those views of others who do not believe that if a faith-based organization takes a dollar of federal money , they should give up their rights protected by the 1964 civil rights act , but there is no reason to fear allowing the house to make that decision . 
so , later today , we will have an amendment that i will offer on behalf of the gentleman from louisiana ( mr. boustany ) xz4006360 to allow those organizations to have their rights protected under the 1964 civil rights act and still provide these necessary services . 
mr. chairman , when our forefathers in the 1960s wrote the 1964 civil rights act landmark legislation , they provided a specific exemption in hiring for religious organizations , understanding that religious organizations would probably want to hire someone of their own faith . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
why would president bill clinton have signed all of these bills into law if , in fact , this was such a bad idea ? 
because all of these acts , signed into law by president clinton , have the same identical language that is going to be offered later today . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
and we know from all of the studies for low-income children to have a chance in school , going through an early childhood development program like head start is absolutely essential and that those children that are involved in head start and other like programs have a much better opportunity and a much better chance to succeed while they are in school . 
we are about to get into the amendment process where we will consider a number of amendments to perfect this bill , and i would ask my colleagues to pay attention to these amendments . 
i think for most of them there is quite a bit of agreement . 
but , clearly , the one amendment dealing with the rights of faith-based organizations will draw an awful lot of attention . 
if members agree or disagree , we ought to have that right and we ought to respect the outcome of that vote . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i appreciate the amendment offered by my friend , the gentleman from indiana , a member of our committee . 
it is over a very sensitive issue of how to deal with the parent councils . 
under the current law , the current practice , these parent advisory councils have actually had veto authority over the decisions of the head start grantee . 
but we have seen a number of problems in head start programs , from financial abuses to very poor results for children ; and the gentleman from california ( mr. george miller ) xz4002780 and i have worked closely to develop this bill and to develop this proposal that continues to allow parents to be actively involved . 
the only difference here is the veto power : whether , in fact , the parent councils can veto the decisions of the board or the management . 
now , this bill came out of committee 48 to nothing with the language that we are trying to preserve . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i am pleased to yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 , the chairman of the subcommittee and the author of the bill . 
mr. chairman , i suggest to my colleagues that the amendment the gentleman from wisconsin offers , he and i have worked together on this closely over the course of this year . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
given what we are trying to accomplish in terms of helping children be ready for school , we ought to have all of the providers possible . 
mr. chairman , i think the point we are trying to make here is there is a lot of innovation that is underway in terms of bringing technology and other innovation to the whole idea of learning . 
that is where i am willing to take the chance that new ideas , new innovations in terms of developing these children , could be very beneficial to the program . 
unfortunately , with the hurricane moving now somewhat east of where it was , he decided to return to his district in central and southwestern louisiana . 
faith-based organizations such as churches , synagogues , and charities are an essential fabric of local communities across america . 
this amendment will correct a flaw in the federal head start law that has stripped these organizations of their hiring rights , forcing them to relinquish their civil liberties if they choose to participate in federal early childhood programs that are poised to be reauthorized today . 
unfortunately , each time we have had this debate , opponents of faith-based groups ' federally protected right to maintain their religious nature and character through those they hire have equated these civil liberties with discrimination . 
the 1964 civil rights act makes clear that faith-based groups may serve their communities without being forced to give up their right to employ individuals who share the tenets and practices of their faith . 
were the authors of the civil rights act pro-discrimination ? 
the amendment we are considering today is offered in the same spirit as the 1964 civil rights act , the 1987 supreme court decision , and each of the four laws signed into law by president bill clinton . 
considering the proven track record of faith-based providers in meeting the needs of our nation , efforts we are seeing in action right now in the gulf coast region , why would we want to deny them the opportunity to make a difference in the lives of head start students ? 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from north carolina ( ms. foxx ) xz4006430 , a member of our committee . 
mr. chairman , i am pleased to yield 1 minute to the gentleman from south carolina ( mr. inglis ) xz4006490 , a member of our committee . 
mr. chairman , the previous speaker talked about how we brought this bill out of our committee and brought it to the house , with a unanimous vote out of the committee , 48 to nothing . 
one of the reasons that this language was not included in the original bill was to try to create a spirit of bipartisanship in moving the process along . 
in the 1964 civil rights act , and amendments to it in 1974 , religious organizations were granted an exception in their hiring practices so they could hire people of their own faith . 
over the years , religious organizations have been involved in doing all types of good works , including providing programs in their communities . 
but , for far too long , these organizations have been denied the use of federal dollars in order to preserve their religious heritage . 
over the years , a number of programs passed by this congress have been signed into law that have allowed religious organizations to maintain the rights given to them under the 1964 civil rights act and provide services with federal funds . 
as a matter of fact , bill clinton , bill clinton , during 8 years in office , signed 4 laws into law that had the same identical language as being offered to this bill today . 
what we have been trying to do in the work force investment act , the community services block grant act , today in the head start act , is bring some consistency to the federal rules and regulations in terms of allowing faith-based providers to offer services without having to give up their protections under the civil rights act . 
and for the members who have been paying some attention to this , we know that members on different sides of the aisle , and frankly it is on a bipartisan basis , have deeply held convictions about this . 
mr. chairman , i yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from nebraska ( mr. osborne ) xz4003030 . 
mr. speaker , i thank the gentleman for yielding me this time , and i rise to say a couple of things . 
mr. speaker , we worked very hard to make this a piece of legislation that could be supported by all of us , and i think we succeeded on that , as was shown by the unanimous vote coming out of the committee on education and the workforce . 
there are a lot of issues . 
we may disagree , and in fact i disagree with a couple of the amendments , but i agree with most of them on both sides . 
i think there are some very good , positive suggestions , and i know sometimes we complain about closed rules , whatever , but this is certainly a rule that is not closed , that is going to allow a lot of opportunity for debate . 
i have listened to part of the debate here on the faith-based that is going to go on all day , i suppose . 
there is disagreement with respect to that , which is unfortunate because it detracts from what is a piece of legislation that otherwise we could all support . 
we are now diverting it to more of an academic program . 
we need to get all of these kids up to the starting line , equal . 
i , like i think most of us , if not all of us , believe very strongly in the head start program , and i believe that this act emphasizes every child , regardless of his or her economic status , should have the best chance possible to succeed . 
the goal of the program was , as it remains today , to provide children a solid foundation that will prepare them for success in school and later in life . 
as the centerpiece of the federal government 's efforts to support quality early childhood education for our nation 's most disadvantaged youth , head start has served nearly 20 million low-income children and their families . 
in my home state of delaware , head start programs serve over 1 , 500 children , with almost 500 additional 4-year-olds receiving assistance through state government funding . 
towards the goal of closing the readiness gap , the school readiness act strengthens head start 's academic focus while maintaining its comprehensive nature that is imperative to its success . 
the bill improves the academic focus of the program by establishing new quality standards that ensure enrolled children develop and demonstrate language skills ; pre-reading knowledge ; including an interest in and appreciation of books ; reading and writing ; pre-math knowledge such as recognition of numbers and counting ; cognitive abilities related to academic achievement ; and social development important for environments constructive for child development , early learning , and school success . 
research clearly and consistently demonstrates a link between the learning potential of children and the level of education and training of classroom teachers . 
for that reason , we improve the quality of teachers in head start classrooms by requiring that , in time , 50 percent of all head start teachers nationwide must have a baccalaureate degree . 
i am sure some of my colleagues were pleased to learn that this bill does not include a block grant or a state demonstration project . 
i believe strongly , however , in the policy goals of coordination and integration that were at the heart of the demonstration project incorporated in the legislation i introduced last congress . 
about 40 states , including delaware , have established some form of early childhood education , because states recognize that these services can make a real difference in preparing children for a successful future . 
various local initiatives have been launched , and today , disadvantaged children and families have access to programs and services from a wide range of sources . 
some of these programs rival or exceed the quality of head start , while others fall short . 
as i have said , i believe in the program , particularly because of how the program helps children later in their academic lives . 
despite these stories , we have also heard many stories of programs in which funds were being diverted away from this purpose . 
the gao made a couple of recommendations on how we can strengthen the oversight structure to prevent abuses and protect good grantees . 
in response to the gao 's recommendations , we are increasing the competitive nature of current program . 
the competition requirements in the school readiness act will help to alleviate these programs , but more importantly , will drive program improvement across the board , program improvements that will ultimately help thousands of children nationwide , which should always be our goal . 
the importance of early childhood education services can not be overstated , and i believe strongly in the reforms which are here . 
i would say finally , although we may have some disagreement about some of the amendments on this legislation , that ultimately getting all these children up to the starting line equal in school , and particularly those who are at 100 percent of poverty or less , is in the best interests of all of us in congress and all the kids out there in the united states of america . 
specifically , the amendment would revise the financial audit language to ensure that financial audit requirements for head start programs are consistent with those required under the single audit act amendments of 1986 ; that it builds on parental consent requirements included in h.r. 2123 as reported , to further clarify that any health service available to children in head start may not be performed without the prior written consent of the parent ; and included a number of technical and conforming amendments . 
to the best of our knowledge , there is no dispute about this , and the details of it can be discussed at further length if anybody wants . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
edward zigler , who is opposed , by the way , to some things that i was for in the past , so i do not always quote him , but he is widely credited as the father of head start , and many people follow him here , and he stated with respect to the policy council : `` i created and implemented the policy councils in the early 1970s . 
in fact , i very much like that the house bill keeps in place the policy council with the role i had in mind for it , while putting above it a board of directors with what i see to be some good requirements for membership on this board . 
i think this is the right governance for our head start operations in the united states of america . 
i urge the defeat of this amendment . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise today to oppose the boustany amendment to the school readiness act of 2005 ( h.r. 2123 ) . 
at a time when 37 million americans endure the plight of poverty , congress is tragically debating an amendment that would undermine a successful anti-poverty program . 
head start provides disadvantaged children with a genuine head start in life to outrun the clutches of limited opportunities . 
while h.r. 2123 is not a perfect bill , it positively maintains the successful federal-to-local structure of head start and wisely promotes `` smart accountability. '' mr. chairman , the boustany amendment needlessly dismantles the bipartisan spirit of the underlying bill in an attempt to rectify a nonexistent problem . 
for decades , faith-based organizations that provide head start services have ably met the needs of children , while adhering to the law protecting their 198 , 000 teachers and 1.4 million volunteers from employment discrimination . 
those whose race , gender , or lifestyle are not aligned with a particular interpretation of faith could be prohibited from federally funded employment under the guise of preserving religious expression . 
that is why hundreds of faith-based and civil rights organizations are leading the fight against this discriminatory amendment . 
the boustany amendment is a poison pill that represents the worst of partisan politics . 
at a hearing held by the government reform subcommittee on criminal justice , drug policy and human resources , of which i am the ranking member , david kuo , former deputy director of the white house office of faith-based and community initiatives , testified that : `` at the same time , many members of the president 's own party expressed equal parts apathy and antipathy towards this agenda . 
a good fight for partisanship perhaps , but less good for the poor. '' his words are telling of how some in this body are using religion to divide the nation and to enact federally subsidized discrimination . 
as many of my colleagues have pointed out and i will repeat for emphasis -- current law already supports the notion that faith-based organizations can use its own private funds to decide who it wants to hire on the basis of religion , they simply can not discriminate in hiring with american taxpayers ' dollars . 
mr. chairman , in this new century so rich with opportunities to right the wrongs of our past , let us embrace our democratic values and put the needs of our children ahead of partisan political interests . 
i thought they were a waste of time . 
i would say that a friend of mine said that when we are talking about the religious aspect of this , he said , when you come to congress and somebody will say , you wear the lord on your shoulder , he said , you tell them that is wrong ; you wear them on your whole body . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
we have had a very good process i think in the committee on education and the workforce in moving toward the reauthorization of head start . 
it is a good group of people to work with . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
one of the strengths of head start has been encouraging parents to volunteer ; and tens of thousands of parents , as we know , have gone on to develop skills to become a paid aide or teacher . 
one of my colleagues mentioned that he is very supportive of the bill , which helps and supports military families , and i fully agree with that . 
that i can not support , mr. chairman , and i hope members will oppose that kind of discrimination . 
for all the program 's success , we know that even the best teachers struggle with overwhelming class sizes , particularly with young children , and head start 's 10 to 1 ratio of students to teachers in the classroom presents clear challenges in helping head start children gain the cognitive skills other children have . 
we all know the benefits of mentoring , whether it is after school , on weekends , or during the school day , mentoring programs change young peoples ' lives . 
and of course the benefits of mentoring are mutual . 
some of the college student mentors in this initiative will even become head start teachers themselves some day . 
i want to be clear , my amendment would not replace the specialized work of head start teachers . 
there is no substitute for the work of a qualified , trained teacher , nor would anything in this amendment require local head start centers to offer mentoring programs . 
mr. chairman , with this amendment we are simply seeking to supplement the remarkable work of our head start teachers in a way that allows for children to learn at their optimum capacity . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
and they have so much to offer and to give , and then couple that with the tremendous work of the head start teachers . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , as the father of two young sons , i am a strong supporter of the head start program because i want every child in america to have a chance to reach his or her highest god-given potential . 
as a person of faith , i believe in the important role of faith-based organizations in addressing society 's needs , including the education needs of children . 
but also as a person of faith , someone who has revered my religious freedom under the constitution , i am deeply disappointed and offended that the republican leadership of this house has allowed an amendment on the floor today that would deny potentially hundreds of thousands of american citizens a government-funded job simply because of their religious faith . 
how ironic and disappointing it is that just at the very same time that we are preaching to the iraqis that they should adopt a constitution that protects religious freedom , the republican leadership of this house is willing to deny that freedom , that religious freedom to american citizens . 
i wonder how the gentleman from utah ( mr. bishop ) xz4000291 , who is the floor manager on the republican side of this rule , would feel , mr. speaker , if right now i asked him to answer my 20-point religious test . 
in education and 30 years of experience in helping young children get a better education , we are going to deny you , mr. jones xz4002092 or mrs. smith , this federally funded head start job because you did not pass our personal religious test . 
next , i think it is inconsistent with article vi of the constitution . 
we have heard a lot of debate about strict construction of the constitution . 
the spirit of that article is that you should not have to pass a religious test to get a publicly funded taxpayer-paid-for job . 
talk about strict interpretation of the constitution . 
in early childhood education or even special education , simply because of their religious faith they are denied the right to have that job to help children . 
mr. chairman , you can use whatever rhetoric you want , but at the end of the day , this amendment not only legalizes religious discrimination in america , it pays for that discrimination using american taxpayer dollars . 
it is disappointing to me , and i think to the vast majority of americans , that on the same day we are pleading with iraqis to provide religious freedom to their citizens , the republican leadership and this house , with this amendment , is saying it is okay to force an american citizen to choose between his or her faith and his or her job . 
i think people of faith are going to be offended by the fact that some in this house think that groups have got to be able to discriminate based on religion in order to make their programs work . 
the fact is , this amendment supports and allows and subsidizes racial discrimination in job hiring , and no amount of rhetoric can deny that . 
in education and 20 years of experience helping children get a head start in life ; they can still put up that sign . 
mr. chairman , our country has more religious tolerance than any other nation in the world and more religious freedom than any other nation in the world because we have not allowed this kind of discrimination in america . 
and i have difficulty understanding the rationale for opposing this amendment because it has been established in law for some time that churches have the right to hire on the basis of religion and the activities they pursue . 
i understand some of the arguments offered , but i would point out the difficulties that one can discover immediately . 
as an example , the gentleman from nebraska ( mr. osborne ) xz4003030 pointed out in the debate last year that one of his local churches operates a head start program , but they do not hire full-time people for that . 
they hire part-time people who also work for the church the rest of the day . 
obviously , they should be allowed to hire on the basis of religion for the operations of the church . 
i come from a city that is often called the city of churches , grand rapids , michigan , a great many churches often working together . 
their first call was to grace , the grand rapids area ecumenical group , which , through the churches , put together a shelter in a matter of 2 or 3 days . 
again , all of these workers were affiliated with churches and were hired partly on the basis of their religious faith . 
why exclude such a potent social force from working with the government in cases of emergency or at any other time ? 
that is not the motivation of the churches in grand rapids or across this country . 
they understand , based on their spiritual commitment , that they have a responsibility to their fellow human beings and that , in the name of god , they are to minister to others who are in need . 
and that is why they are an effective social force in meeting the needs of the poor , meeting the needs of those who are hurting , and that is the reason that they are an effective agency of the federal government to work with in terms of crisis , emergency , or simple pain and need on the part of certain people . 
this amendment that is being offered will allow the continuation of that effort in the head start program ; and , frankly , we should allow it in every program . 
why should we rule out one of the most effective and one of the most potent social organizations in the nation , that is , religious organizations , who are dedicated to doing good , who are seeking to do good , who are trying to honor their lord by doing good , and they can be a very effective force ? 
i want to commend the chairman and the committee for producing a very good bill that reauthorizes head start so america 's children get the same type of investment that we have been providing iraqi children . 
the rest of the country is looking at us and asking us to please put politics aside and put progress first . 
mr. chairman , it is amendments like this that remind me why 29 percent of the american people think the congress is doing a good job , but well over 75 percent of the american people think this congress is failing to meet the obligations and the challenges that america has . 
the chairman of the committee did a good job in the committee , producing a good bill that builds on the progress of the last 40 years and continues to invest in america 's children , and you chose to put an amendment on this floor , unprecedented , that chose to divide america , not unite it , to choose politics over progress , and to continue the same policies that has taken this congress to the lowest esteem ever in the american people 's history . 
i just would read the amendment : `` not later than one year after implementation of the head start teacher qualifications and development under amendments made by this act , the secretary of health and human services shall submit to congress a report on head start teacher retention levels. '' i rise to support this amendment , and i want to thank the gentlewoman from california ( ms. woolsey ) xz4004360 , my good friend , who for the 13 years she has been here has been a tireless advocate for head start and all other education programs that provide access of all our country 's children to the quality education that they deserve . 
we all know and we have heard today from both sides of the aisle about the importance and quality of head start . 
it has played , for four decades now , a vital role in the lives of thousands of children and parents across the country , and certainly in my home area of san diego and imperial counties of california . 
it was clear then , and remains equally clear today , that the work of head start plays an enormously significant role within our education community . 
in fact , we have to answer the question : might we be pricing head start right out of the teaching market ? 
when we drastically increase the work requirements without increasing the salary levels , there is a risk of running many successful and experienced teachers right out of the program . 
so since there is a real possibility of increased teacher requirements leading to a dropoff in the number of experienced head start teachers , i hope the house will accept my amendment , which calls for the secretary of health and human services to submit to congress a study reporting on head start 's teacher retention levels . 
this study will be completed within 1 year of the enactment of the new regulations . 
with this study , we will have an early look at the impact of these regulations . 
it will paint a picture of whether head start teachers are staying and meeting the new requirements or whether these new requirements are inadvertently driving experienced teachers from such an important program as head start . 
these early results will tell us if we are on the correct path or if we need to modify some of the rules before there is more damage . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
i also have fond remembrance of being a graduate student at the university of delaware , which the gentleman knows very well , and appreciate the education in his state of delaware . 
mr. speaker , we did obviously get overwhelming consensus in the committee ; and the vote among the republican members of the committee was something 6 to 1 in favor of the bill . 
some of the objections of some of the more conservative members have been accommodated . 
then , most recently , we decided this is a way to get money , if this bill were to pass quickly , to do housing so badly needed in the gulf area , frankly bypassing some of the normal problems you would have in terms of the need for regulations at omb . 
there has been a lot of concern about relief efforts that add to the deficit . 
this would be hundreds of millions of dollars , because it comes from the profits of fannie mae and freddie mac , not on the deficit . 
well , as i read the constitution , i did not find the word negotiation in private among the majority party as part of article i. i thought bringing bills to the floor and having debates and votes was the way to do it . 
a bill adopted in an open process with hearings and debates in committee and amendments passes 65 to 5. it has been , what , months since that bill was voted out of committee ; and there have been some negotiations . 
the notion that the bill can not come to the floor until all but three members of the majority are satisfied really flies in the face of democracy . 
if there are differences , what is the objection to letting the majority of the house of representatives vote ? 
why can not we let democracy work , and then , whichever side wins , the bill passes and hundreds of millions of dollars are available for the gulf . 
the gentlewoman from california ( ms. waters ) xz4004220 , the ranking member of the subcommittee on housing , has said giving assurance to the people of new orleans , the poorer people in particular of new orleans , and , frankly , a lot of african american people , that we will be committed to rebuilding the city so they can come back home is very important . 
mr. chairman , first , the first half of the gentleman 's remarks previously are irrelevant . 
we are not disputing the importance of including faith-based groups as providers . 
no one is saying that a faith-based using its own money , using private money , using private donations has to pay any attention to the question of hiring if they choose to have only their religious co-workers . 
the question is if a faith-based group wants to take federal money paid for by every taxpayer in this country , is it a violation of their religious character to say , with that federal money , they must not discriminate in hiring ? 
the religious character being imputed to these groups makes me think that we are talking about the constitution of the iraq . 
are we not trying to promote the notion of people living together ? 
of course we want religious groups there . 
what violation of the religious right of a catholic is to say you have to hire a methodist ? 
how are episcopalians being deprived of their religious integrity if they are told that , you know what , when you have federal money in this program , if you hire a presbyterian , that is okay . 
again , we are talking about federal money , and we are talking about not imputing to religious groups an insistence on bigotry and discrimination in the spending of federal funds . 
now , in the vast majority of cases that is going to be a public entity , but in some cases and in some places it might just be a faith-based organization . 
these organizations that are trying to reach out , that are taking a chance to help provide these services because they see people in need , the government should not say to them if they are going to help out , i am sorry , they have to surrender much of their religious character . 
if we fail to adopt this amendment and fail to protect the rights of these faith-based organizations to retain their religious character in such things as hiring , it is not these groups that will suffer . 
i rise in support of the rule , but most especially in support of the rule allowing for the offering of the amendment by the gentleman from louisiana ( mr. boustany ) xz4006360 . 
this amendment is clearly dominating a lot of the discussion this morning regarding the rule . 
it is the one that protects faith-based head start providers , and it is so important for us to be very sensitive about this issue as we look to those who are willing to provide some very difficult services and ones that certainly the providers must be very interested in as far as the well-being of the student , the well-being of the families involved in these programs . 
we the congress have specified in several statutes that religious organizations that receive federal funds in the form of grants or contracts must not lose their title vii exemption . 
if we tell faith-based groups they can not hire on a faith basis in order to receive federal funds , then we will force those organizations out of providing these services . 
some examples of laws that we have passed that allow for faith-based groups to continue to hire on their continued basis are the personal responsibility and work opportunities reconciliation act , or welfare reform of 1996 ; the substance abuse and mental health services administration act of 1998 ; the community service block grant act , which everyone has been very supportive of ; as well as the community renewal tax relief act of 2000 . 
they should hire the best people and the ones who are most capable of carrying out their mission . 
the very reason why many of these organizations will win the contracts is because they have the best track record of service and results . 
i think it is important for us , as members of the united states house of representatives , to be very careful as we move forward on this bill . 
the point of faith-based providers is that they are mostly obviously church people who have a mission . 
they are encouraging service within their church , and we should allow them to provide that service because we know that they have the best track record of success . 
mr. speaker , yesterday the committee on rules reported out a restrictive rule providing for the consideration of the school readiness and head start reauthorization act . 
a total of 24 amendments were submitted to the committee on rules on this bill , 16 by democratic members and eight by republicans . 
in typical fashion , however , only 12 of those amendments were made in order . 
half of our colleagues ' proposals , half of their legislative ideas , half of their amendments are blocked from consideration under this rule . 
this includes , among many others , the mccollum-van hollen amendment , which calls for providing assistance to head start providers complying with congressional transportation mandates and the rising costs of gasoline . 
as all members should know , head start was created to address the preparatory educational deficiencies among economically disadvantaged children as a part of the war on poverty . 
since that time , millions of children and families have been the beneficiaries of a proven winning educational model for early childhood development . 
we devise and implement all kinds of plans in order to be ready or prepared for any eventuality . 
it gives systematically , economically and socially disadvantaged children the head start that potentially allows for the navigation and negotiation of hurdles in life 's race that they may not otherwise have been able to maneuver without . 
it is at this very point in the lives of our children that they are introduced to varying themes and concepts that will shape them into the individuals they will become . 
several of my democratic colleagues from the congressional black caucus have designed excellent amendments designed to broaden the scope of readiness for america 's disadvantaged children . 
the gentleman from illinois ( mr. davis ) xz4000922 had an amendment and it asked for the recruitment of african american and latino men to become head start teachers . 
the gentleman from mississippi 's ( mr. thompson ) xz4004032 amendment calls for the department of health and human services to provide additional assistance in areas affected by hurricane katrina , and i suggested to the chair that we broaden that to include any disaster so that children are covered who are in the head start category . 
i am pleased that they were made in order and enthusiastically support each of these amendments . 
unfortunately , although the underlying legislation has the support of both parties , the rule also makes in order a controversial and discriminatory amendment offered by the gentleman from louisiana ( mr. boustany ) xz4006360 , our colleague . 
his amendment contains language that should give all of us pause and may cause this bill not to pass should it be approved by this body . 
we are supposed to be about the business of creating opportunities and closing gaps . 
the boustany amendment only creates opportunities of systemic disadvantage and discrimination and closes doors to the very ones trying to open them for america 's children . 
even more , title vii of the 1964 civil rights act clearly stands in opposition to the gentleman from louisiana 's ( mr. boustany ) xz4006360 amendment , the same title vii that was voted on and agreed to by the members of this great body 41 years ago . 
supporters of the amendment will argue that the supreme court decision in the amos case allows for the amendment to be in order and is , therefore , constitutional . 
that decision does , in fact , allow for the consideration of religion in hiring practices . 
however , it does not allow for the consideration of religion to discriminate in hiring practices . 
mr. speaker , if we are serious about the lives of our children , if we are serious about readiness , if we are serious about reauthorizing head start , then it is critical that we continue to work in a bipartisan fashion and reject proposals which seek to divide this body and its members . 
the chairman of this committee and the ranking member and the members of this committee have worked very actively to fashion a reasonable and bipartisan effort . 
congress should not be in the business of supporting state-sponsored discrimination . 
the house should , without question or hesitation , reject the boustany amendment and approve the bipartisan underlying legislation with some of the proposed amendments . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i can not impress enough to the chairman that title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 applies to the use of religious organizations ' own resources , not federal taxpayer dollars . 
mr. speaker , i am very pleased to yield 2 minutes to the distinguished gentlewoman from california ( ms. woolsey ) xz4004360 , my classmate , the ranking member of the subcommittee on education reform , the subcommittee of relevant jurisdiction for this legislation . 
mr. speaker , i am very pleased to yield 3 minutes to the distinguished gentleman from missouri ( mr. cleaver ) xz4006390 , a man of the cloth , a reverend representative . 
it will be for 30 minutes ; 435 members of this body are going to have 30 minutes to debate this . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. speaker , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
she played piano for all of the churches in town , four in altamonte springs . 
it was very difficult , but all of the children in that town went to all of the churches . 
for 41 years head start has existed , and it is the most empirically collected database organization supporting the children of the united states of america . 
and for all of those 41 years , all of these faith-based organizations have been involved in receiving contracts to do business . 
mr. speaker , i object to the vote on the ground that a quorum is not present and make the point of order that a quorum is not present . 
mr. chairman , today on the floor we have what is increasingly rare these days , a bipartisan bill , a bill that would help thousands of head start children and their families . 
it is one of the great successes of our government . 
i am pleased that the bill avoids the proposed use of state block grants . 
it improves the prospect for children of migrant and seasonal workers , of service men and women , of native americans . 
we still have a long way to go to give all eligible children the benefits of head start , but basically this is a good bill . 
it is an amendment that would allow american tax dollars , tax dollars of ordinary americans , all americans , to be used for religious discrimination . 
the nondiscrimination provision of head start has been reauthorized in 1984 , 1986 , 1990 , 1994 , and 1998 . 
it is to protect freedom of religion , of religious belief and practice . 
since 1965 , head start has helped over 20 million children build the confidence and skills they need to succeed in school and to become the leaders and productive citizens of the future . 
i am pleased that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have not pursued their strategy of last year and have worked with members from this side of the aisle to produce a bill that does not include the block grant proposal that was advanced in the last congress . 
i am also pleased that the bill will align head start curricula with k-12 education while preserving the comprehensive nature of the head start program . 
at the same time , the proposal will provide continuity for children by retaining the essential parental involvement , nutrition , and other non-academic features of head start . 
i am concerned , however , that while the bill requires teachers to have higher academic degrees , it provides no funding to support the implementation of its important teacher quality provisions . 
i strongly oppose this amendment , which would allow faith based-sponsored head start programs to use federal taxpayer dollars to discriminate against qualified teachers and other employees solely because of their religion or personal religious views . 
head start began as a civil rights platform -- ensuring that all children , regardless of race , ethnicity , or religion -- get a head start in life . 
to trample on this now will turn back the clock on the progress we have made in protecting the civil rights of the people we entrust to give our children a head start . 
allowing discrimination based on religion would significantly impede the important goals of head start as well as sending a damaging message to students . 
as chair of the congressional asian pacific american caucus , i recognize how important head start is to apa communities . 
in california alone , over 6 , 000 apa children are enrolled in head start , with over half of them coming from homes where english is not the primary language . 
mr. chairman , i urge all members to put the needs of children first , vote against the boustany amendment which is a poison pill that will kill this bill , and make a real commitment to improve the head start program . 
mr. speaker , i rise for the purposes of inquiring of the majority leader the schedule for the week to come , and i am pleased to yield to the distinguished majority leader , the gentleman from texas ( mr. delay ) xz4001040 . 
first of all , on the general proposition for the month of october , we had had discussions last week ; and it is clear that the second week of october , it will not be practical to meet because of the various important dates on that week . 
could the majority leader bring us up to date on where currently the thinking of the leader 's office is on where we will be on the first week of october ? 
i realize the problems of doing that ; but many of our members , particularly those who come from far away , are concerned about traveling on that wednesday , as the gentleman knows , which makes it problematic because we will have to be very late thursday . 
can the majority leader give us a view on what might be the status of next friday ? 
mr. speaker , reclaiming my time , i am presuming , and there was some discussion about this last week , that at some point in time in the next couple of weeks , we are going to have to do some sort of continuing resolution . 
mr. speaker , does the gentleman have any thoughts at this point in time regarding the length of time of the initial cr that we would consider ? 
we do hope that this bill can be brought to the floor , certainly before , hopefully if not the end of next week , the week following . 
because we believe it is the kind of legislation that people would be proud of . 
there obviously is a difference of view of how soon that those dollars could flow from the ranking member of the subcommittee and the ranking member of the full committee . 
and if so , will those bills go through the committee of jurisdiction and be considered under rules on the floor that allow full debate ? 
you mentioned , as a preface to that , obviously almost all of us voted for the $ 52 billion . 
but i think everybody on the floor was concerned about the level of information we had about what had been spent of the $ 10 billion , how much was going to be spent , on what , of the $ 52 billion . 
the overwhelming majority of us on both sides of the aisle have voted for all of the bills that you just referenced on the theory , as you said , that we need to move ahead on the pell grants and tanf and on the dollars themselves , on liability issues . 
but the failure to give full consideration to them , assuming full consideration does not mean days and weeks delay but a full day of consideration of these pieces of legislation , we believe is appropriate , particularly if we deal with another very large money bill . 
we hope it goes through committee , and we hope it comes to the floor with an opportunity for members to make suggestions in forms of amendment , either cutting or adding or shifting , as the case may be , those resources . 
because we think that is , you know , the theory of the process is , our collective judgments are better than our individual judgments . 
and if we start considering it early , while the $ 52 billion is still available to be expended to assist those , it will give us a little bit of time to go through the process that the gentleman indicates is the best process . 
the american public is very concerned about their energy costs , about the policies of this country . 
we have put off reconciliation at least until the end of the month , as i understand it probably until october . 
reclaiming my time , the last bill i would ask you about is the subject matter that has been one of the biggest subjects that we have been considering this year . 
let me say on behalf of the minority , the democrat side of the aisle shares your concern and commitment to assuring retirement security for our people . 
as you know , we strongly disagree with the suggestion that has been made by the administration with reference to the creation of private accounts and what we perceive as privatizing parts of social security . 
but i want you to be assured that we share your view that we want to make sure that retirement accounts are secure and that americans have opportunities to participate in the creation of retirement accounts . 
i think that is good for the passage of this bill . 
there are 24 judy centers around the state of maryland right now , many of which include head start . 
this bill was reported out of committee almost unanimously , if not unanimously . 
the previous gentleman indicated he does not know of any instance where there has been discrimination . 
if we do not reject that amendment , the overwhelming majority of us on this side of the aisle are going to vote against this bill . 
mr. chairman , i rise today to address the house about h.r. 2123 , the head start school readiness act of 2005 . 
once again , we gather here to address the needs of the nation 's youth and debate how we will meet those needs . 
for the past 30 years , head start has set the foundation for the educational achievement of most young children in this country and has many of today 's successful young adults as its proof of effectiveness . 
we realized that it would take special effort and targeted resources to prepare children for the rigors of the academic day . 
we , as a nation , have risen to the call of our children and provided a caring , nurturing responsive environment for them . 
we spend millions of dollars every year training teachers to carry out the head start function . 
mr. chairman , rejecting my amendment i believe deprived the american people of an opportunity to hear how their elected representatives viewed something as critical as head start . 
as one who has fought tirelessly for the victims of natural and manmade disasters , i have supported every effort to rebuild new york after 9/11 ; i have supported every dime of supplemental funds for the victims of hurricane katrina ; i have supported appropriations bills for every conceivable assistance package this country has had to provide . 
i now stand in support of retaining qualified certified and government-trained teachers in a head start program free from discrimination , prejudice and intolerance . 
what they will hear is a debate on an amendment designed to re-introduce discrimination and disadvantage to a program created to overcome the vestiges of poverty , racism , and academic neglect . 
this house will debate an amendment today to permit faith-based recipients of federal head start dollars to discriminate against individual based on their individual , guaranteed right of free religious affiliation . 
not to mention separation of church and state . 
mr. chairman , this is a sad and unfortunate event in the history of this august body : that after over 200 years as a sovereign country -- with a checkered past , at best , on discrimination , we now debate discrimination by statute in the case of our young and budding leaders of tomorrow . 
i raise the highest objection that i can to rolling back over 200 years of progress on justice , harmony and tolerance . 
i rise in objection to holding the future of head start hostage to this provision . 
i commend the chairman and the ranking minority on the education and workforce committee for their commitment to the children of this nation by presenting a bill free of polarizing provisions . 
unlike so many contentious issues brought before the house , bipartisanship was not d.o.a. -- '' dead on arrival. '' instead , a bipartisan , thought provoking legislative initiative was d.u.a. -- '' dead under attack. '' mr. chairman , i urge my colleagues to reject this amendment and let head start get on with the business of preparing america 's youth for tomorrow . 
mr. speaker , i rise today in support of the rule and of the underlying head start bill . 
head start is a crucial program for over 900 , 000 of our nation 's most needy students . 
a good head start program will make sure that low-income 4-year-old children will know their abcs , be able to count to 20 , have the building blocks they need to hit the ground running on their first day of kindergarten . 
as a father of two , i know firsthand how precious our children 's first years are and how important they are to our children 's future . 
i am proud of congress ' increased support for low-income children through the head start program , and i urge my colleagues to vote `` yes '' on the rule and `` yes '' on the head start reauthorization bill . 
mr. chairman , the head start bill before us today is a good bill , i plan on voting for it , but i also believe that the souder amendment will make it an even better bill by restoring the full authority of the parent policy councils in the head start program . 
currently , head start programs across the country are jointly governed by a board of directors made up of experts and by a policy council made up of parents . 
regrettably , the head start reauthorization bill before us fundamentally changes the authority of the parent policy councils . 
they told me they were concerned about the reduced role of the parent policy councils under this bill , and they wanted to restore the voting authority . 
the success of head start has been that the parents have been involved at the earliest of ages in their child 's development . 
the amendment by the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. kind ) xz4002180 , which i rise to support , is an amendment that simply says let us take the evidence based on how we should approach education for children and let us apply what we know is the best way to include measurements of a child in their formative years of life . 
what i think all of us saw in the expeditious movement to put in place these tests was the fact that we rushed into it without taking enough time to take a look at it . 
all of my head start teachers have told me that the testing that is currently in place is testing that is not effective and that what would be more effective would be finding out through the national academy of sciences what they recommend in terms of the evaluation of those children . 
head start is about the emotional and social development of a child which can guide their ability to learn literacy all the way down their educational life . 
with that , i thank the chairman of the committee on education and the workforce for this time . 
i would also like to thank the committee leadership on both sides of the aisle for ensuring that all interested parties had a seat at the table during our second try at reauthorizing the head start program . 
i want to specifically thank ruth friedman for her years of work on behalf of the head start children . 
all of us know head start is a critically important program that provides much-needed services to some of our most disadvantaged children and their families . 
currently , indian head start is funded at approximately 2.9 percent of the head start budget . 
all committee members should be proud of the bipartisan work on this legislation . 
i strongly support the bill as it was passed out of the committee . 
mr. chairman , i reluctantly rise in opposition to the passage of the h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act , a bill that reauthorizes the head start program through fiscal year 2011 . 
although the underlying bill enjoys wide , bipartisan support , the adoption of the amendment offered by the gentleman from louisiana ( mr. boustany ) xz4006360 has the effect of being a poison pill and makes the bill unpalatable . 
the boustany amendment permits faith-based organizations providing head start service to hire and fire on the basis of religious affiliation . 
the adoption of this amendment allows faith-based organizations to discriminate in hiring . 
this practice will work against a key object for which head start was designed to address : moving children and families out of poverty . 
the head start program was first established 1964 through the cooperation of african-american churches throughout the segregated south . 
from its birth , head start and the religious community have developed a strong partnership in the delivery of critical education and social services that have been the building blocks to escaping poverty . 
to remove the civil rights protections guaranteed under this program compromises the very purpose of this program . 
it is a rollback of established civil rights laws . 
i ask my colleagues to withdraw that amendment and let this bill , which we do agree on , to go forward to serve the children of our nation who are waiting for opportunities to ensure that no child in america is trapped within poverty 's grasp , to enable every child in america to live up to his or her highest potential . 
if they want to hire people of only a certain faith , they can do that with their own money . 
but when it comes to the use of taxpayers ' dollars , no citizen in this country with the protection of the first amendment should have to pass a religious test to qualify . 
our founders understood the importance of separation of church and state . 
i also believe they did not intend to have america exclude the celebration of spiritual values . 
it is important that we remember the founders ' directives to bring spiritual values of truth , honesty , love of country , but to never break down that wall which separates church and state . 
mr. chairman , i rise today in strong support of the amendment offered by my distinguished colleague , the gentlewoman from connecticut ( ms. delauro ) xz4001030 that would allow head start centers to partner with colleges , universities and community-based organizations to recruit and train college students to serve as mentors and reading coaches to preschool children . 
as congress moves forward to reauthorize head start and make a number of changes , the reauthorization should include meaningful programming to improve the offerings of head start programs . 
this amendment , that allows head start centers to partner with an institution of higher education or a community-based organization in order to recruit and train college students to serve as mentors and reading coaches to preschool children , and would allow children to receive the personal instruction and attention they need to be successfully prepared for school . 
back home in my district in connecticut , the jumpstart hartford program is an excellent example of this type of comprehensive learning partnership . 
jumpstart hartford , in partnership with the university of hartford , facilitates one-on-one instruction with students from the university and young children from low-income families in hartford . 
mr. speaker , i rise today to express my sincere disappointment in the committee on rules decision to report a restrictive rule for consideration of the bill before us today , the reauthorization of head start , the future of our children . 
not surprising , most of them were democratic amendments . 
in the committee , there was support of adding the language `` faith-based '' into the bill , even though faith-based institutions currently participate in providing head start programs . 
but there was another amendment that was not ruled in order , my amendment , an amendment which would have protected the privacy of our faith-based organizations and the integrity of our tax dollars . 
well , first , we need to protect federal tax dollars from being used improperly ; and , secondly , we need to protect the privacy of faith-based organizations ' accounting books for their religious mission . 
with the commingling of funds , if fraud is suspected , a faith-based organization would have to open up all of their books for inspection . 
my amendment would have required separate accounts , therefore , protecting the church 's mission and the federal education mission of head start . 
from the covenant : `` churches are particularly vulnerable to embezzlement because of the high-level of trust given to employees and volunteers that lack the sophistication , fiscal controls , and oversight. '' my amendment simply would have been a preemptive strike against financial abuse that we know will happen because it has already occurred . 
sandra was behind on a number of other bills and her creditors were calling . 
she would use one of the company 's checks to pay her bill . 
`` no one will know. '' to disguise her actions , sandra recorded the check under the name of one of the company 's vendors . 
when the bank statement came , she removed the canceled check , leaving no trace of the theft . 
from 1992 to 1999 , sandra , a former small town cheerleader and mother of two , wrote out eighty-eight checks to pay her bills and made eighty-eight false entries . 
the total , according to fsb , was $ 248 , 383 -- all of it going to pay living expenses . 
while she was gone , one of the canceled checks was found and her boss discovered what she had done . 
sandra was convicted of embezzlement and sentenced to eighteen months in prison . 
while fraud at major companies like world com and enron have made headlines in recent years , small businesses , nonprofits , and churches arc particularly vulnerable to embezzlement because of the level of trust given to employees and volunteers and the lack of sophisticated financial controls and oversight . 
those claims total over $ 8 million , with an average claim of $ 2 , 106 . 
in the past ten years , at least eleven covenant churches have reported being victims of embezzlement , with anywhere from `` just over '' $ 10 , 000 to more than $ 300 , 000 taken by people they trusted -- volunteer treasurers , church staff , even a pastor . 
and the actual number of embezzlements is likely higher because many churches are reluctant to report when a member of the church has embezzled money . 
kent egging , interim pastor of bethany covenant church in mount vernon , washington , has studied embezzlement in churches as part of a doctor of ministry degree program . 
egging also knows the effects of embezzlement on a church firsthand -- while he was co-pastor of a covenant church in portland , oregon , the church 's treasurer embezzled more than $ 45 , 000 . 
the embezzlement began in 1992 , soon after jim , a member of the church , became treasurer . 
if he says he 'll do anything you want right now to repay it , two months from now he wo n't be willing to do anything. '' much of what egging 's friend said was accurate . 
`` we ended up having a stipulated statement of judgment , '' says egging , `` which is a combination of a legally binding confession to a crime , so there is no need for prosecution , and a contract for repayment. '' the agreement for repayment was for about $ 50 , 000 . 
the first step is getting an accurate picture of what was lost . 
`` the biggest issue in all of this is trust , the violation of trust . 
the trust of leaders in the congregation was in question because of this. '' to prevent any embezzlement from happening in the future , the church revamped its entire financial system . 
that 's an area of vulnerability in most churches , says egging . 
`` i would bet that most churches in america have some or a significant number of financial records at somebody 's house in a box or on somebody 's home computer , '' he says , `` because home computers are generally better than church computers . 
the church had a number of common financial safeguards in place -- two signatures were required on every check , two people were present whenever collections were counted , and the church did an internal audit of its book each year . 
highland also practiced a `` segregation of duties. '' one person , the financial secretary , deposited funds ; another person , the bookkeeper , prepared checks . 
`` but every few months , she would call up and say her printer was n't working , '' says dave kersten , who was pastor of highland covenant from 1986 to 1997 . 
when this happened , beth would prepare all of the payroll checks by hand and then send them to the church office to be signed . 
`` instead of it being a check for $ 700 -- it could become a check for $ 4 , 700. '' over a seven-year period , beth took more than $ 300 , 000 . 
the embezzlement was not detected because the church 's bookkeeper had control of the bank statements . 
early on , she had asked that all of the church 's bank statement be sent to her home . 
`` as soon as he heard that she had control of the bank statements , he knew that he had a real case , '' kersten says . 
all of those funds had been folded into the church 's checking account . 
and because the embezzlement had taken place slowly , over a long period of time , it was easier to hide even during internal audits . 
they would call up beth and ask her to send 3 months of statements , picked at random . 
`` the books balanced and that was the end of the story. '' the embezzlement came to light in april 1995 , after the church let beth go as bookkeeper because of suspicions that something was wrong with the church 's finances . 
the decision to turn the matter over to the police had been fairly straightforward , because of the amount of money involved . 
because their policy limited the amount of losses due to embezzlement or fraud , highland received less than $ 20 , 000 from their insurance company . 
most churches , charities , and businesses that arc victims of embezzlement are never able to recover the funds they lost . 
many embezzlers have financial problems and , despite stealing large sums of money , have no assets left when they arc caught . 
according to fsb , she makes a monthly payment of $ 100 -- at that rate , it will take 20 years to pay it all back . 
`` but i did a really bad thing. '' protecting your ministry from internal threats when fred meyers was elected treasurer of first community church , it did n't take him long to realize something was n't adding up with the church 's finances . 
after scouring the church ledger and consulting a private cpa , meyers informed church leaders that first community had been the victim of embezzlement . 
overall , nearly $ 10 , 000 of tithes and offerings never made it into the church 's account . 
most church leaders do n't want to acknowledge the likelihood of one of their own parishioners or employees committing a crime against their organization . 
but , although these types of crimes may not be widespread , they are common enough-and costly enough-to warrant preventive measures . 
develop a comprehensive written policy governing the handling of your ministry 's finances . 
having procedures in writing and explaining these procedures to employees and volunteers will promote consistent handling of your organization 's finances . 
written guidelines let everyone know what 's expected of them . 
and , they discourage dishonest employees from using ignorance of proper procedures as a defense of their criminal actions . 
by documenting all financial procedures , your organization can detect discrepancies quickly , protect honest employees from unwarranted accusations , and gather necessary evidence to identify criminals in the event of a financial crime . 
in many cases , at least one other employee or volunteer is aware of -- or at least suspicious of -- fraud or embezzlement . 
develop a program for handling church finances in which the receipt , deposit , distribution , and documentation of church money is carried out by different people . 
tithes and offerings represent the greatest internal threat of loss to churches and ministries . 
and , because significant portions of offerings are made in cash and are usually collected and counted by volunteers , the misuse or misappropriation of cash offerings is one of the easier crimes to commit against churches . 
this will make it harder to discern what portion of the offering is cash and what portion is checks . 
it 's best to use longtime church members who 've established a reputation of being trustworthy . 
develop a list of such people , and periodically rotate those on the list when offerings are counted . 
use keys with serial numbers on them to keep track of which employee or volunteer has which key . 
keep a personal property inventory of your organization 's physical property . 
this will help you quickly tell if something is missing , establish proper insurance protection , and allow a faster , more comprehensive recovery in the event of a loss . 
following these guidelines will help you reduce the chance of being victimized from within and help you avoid the high physical , emotional , and monetary costs it can bring . 
this amendment cuts the heart out of it . 
this amendment is offensive to americans who value civil rights , equal justice , and to many , many of us who are strong people of faith . 
faith-based organizations currently are providing head start services , and their mission , their work is valued by all of us . 
mr. chairman , i rise in strong support of h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act , which will strengthen the head start program by closing the readiness gap that exists between low and upper income children . 
i want to thank my good friends , chairman boehner and congressman castle , for their hard work on this important piece of legislation . 
created in 1965 and located in every community in the country , head start has been a valuable part of our nation in preparing lower-income children for elementary school . 
however , in spite of the good efforts of the program , there are still shortcomings that need to be addressed . 
the bill emphasizes cognitive development and the use of scientifically-based research in topics critical to a child 's school readiness . 
the federal government invests nearly $ 7 billion in the program , but sadly , dozens of media stories and an independent investigation by the government accountability office revealed problems in the financial management of some head start grantees . 
we should do all that we can to ensure that head start dollars are going to meet the needs of the students and are not wasted due to a few bad grantees . 
mr. chairman , this bill received unanimous support in committee , and i hope that it will also receive the full support of the whole house . 
h.r. 2123 is a good bill that will improve the lives and educational needs of our nation 's most vulnerable children . 
as we know all too well , the achievement gap that continues to plague our country has early roots , and the sooner we can help young people gain valuable skills , get good nutrition , and provide them with a comprehensive early education , the better chance we have of improving their future . 
it is those children we must think of as we seek to improve this bill . 
i am relieved we are debating a bill that does not produce devastating effects on this program , but instead keeps it intact and provides a number of improvements . 
if for over 30 years religious institutions have not had a problem providing head start services , why would the congress of the united states now sanction and permit discrimination and violate civil liberties ? 
the estimated cost for half of all head start teachers to earn a bachelor 's degree by 2008 , as the bill calls for , is an estimated $ 2 billion over 5 years . 
there is probably no piece of legislation in this congress that is more important to the future of this country and our children and our students than this piece of legislation . 
i have educated as an educator and have worked over the years to try to get improvement in the quality of head start , and i commend all of those involved and also the president of the united states for emphasizing improving the quality of head start . 
unfortunately , over the course of the last years , we have had incidents of waste , fraud , abuse , mismanagement , even financial abuse of taxpayer dollars in the head start programs , and again , we have limited taxpayer dollars to expend , and we want them expended in the most efficient and proper manner . 
while a large majority of head start programs have very responsible management and organization in place , i think congress has an obligation to improve known problems before they get worse and also insist on correction . 
so this amendment directs the secretary of hhs to undertake a management reform initiative , and i want to thank the gentleman from ohio ( mr. boehner ) xz4000360 for crafting this amendment , and he has my strong support , and i am pleased to offer it because we want this to be the best program possible . 
in conclusion , i just want to give a couple of examples . 
i have one head start program i looked at that has 135 students , 17 teachers , and none of the teachers are certified in the program . 
this amendment will go a long way towards achieving that goal and making certain that every one of these taxpayer dollars are spent in the best way to benefit these children and give them truly a head start . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
in conclusion , i know we all saw the pictures that were quite shocking in new orleans , and many people were stunned by the level of poverty that we saw when the dikes and the levees broke . 
much more was broken in that community and our communities , and that is , the education of our poorest children . 
no piece of legislation will do more , i think , in advancing the interests and the educational opportunities for our children than this legislation . 
so i thank the gentlewoman from california ( ms. woolsey ) xz4004360 , i thank the gentleman from ohio ( chairman boehner ) , the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 , and others involved in moving this important piece of legislation forward , improving the quality and also improving the management , making certain with this amendment that every dollar goes towards the betterment of those disadvantaged in our society . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
what we tried to do in the committee bill is to make sure that there was a clear line of accountability on some of these fiscal matters . 
we struggled long and hard on this committee with the question of fiscal management and mismanagement of a number of these programs . 
while the vast majority of head start programs are well-run programs that provide excellent services , the services that we have come to expect from those programs on behalf of these children in head start , we have had some problems . 
it is about increasing the accountability , increasing the accountability of this board , so they will understand the gravity of the situation , which they have . 
we have also strengthened the parent policy council to be involved in all aspects of program authorization , and we require that the board act on those priorities . 
the fact of the matter is , i think many , many people involved in head start believe that this is a very substantial improvement that will avoid the kinds of problems that we have seen in the past that have drained resources from this agency , taken away from the services provided to these children . 
parents have been an integral part of this program from the beginning , they continue to be , and , in fact , their position is strengthened in this legislation . 
but we must deal in a forthright manner with this question of fiscal accountability , and we are making those boards more accountable in this legislation ; and i hope that we would reject the souder amendment . 
the fact of the matter is , if there are these kinds of savings to be had , either the grant is not right or the money should be put back into the services . 
when we have a program here that is failing to meet the demand for head start , it would seem to me if this is a high-quality program and it has the difference between 13 percent and 13.5 percent and 15 percent , which could be a couple hundred thousand dollars on a $ 10 million grant , which is not that unusual , that ought to be plowed into the program to extend the opportunity of this high-quality program to these children . 
when we look at the low pay and the profit-making in the nonprofit sector of head start , you would think that we would put that into quality to try to raise the pay so we can attract teachers with more education and child development experience and all of the rest of those issues . 
to now suggest , because somebody has put in some efficiencies , that money should now go to the for-profits , instead of services and extension of the benefits of head start to this population that is in so much need of these services , just does not make sense . 
and to suggest that you can somehow eke out a profit that is not returned to the benefit of the program , that just does not make any sense . 
i appreciate vendors are dealing with a government grant and very low-income children and it is very difficult to make a profit , but i do not think that we should eke out the means by which that profit can be taken out of the services rendered to those children . 
administrative costs also go with other concerns , the question of accountability and auditing and structuring of these facilities , all of which are part of that , too . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of the school readiness act which will reauthorize the head start program , but this measure will not get my vote if the amendment allowing for religious discrimination is adopted by this house . 
as a former mayor of the city of alexandria , virginia , i know just how important head start programs are to communities because they help to provide our low-income preschool-aged children much needed services such as child development , educational , health , nutritional activities which help them receive greater advantages in life . 
in addition to the educational services that are provided by head start programs , some of the other services include health screenings , such as dental and eye care . 
in my congressional district , one of the most successful head start programs is the alexandria head start . 
this is a collaboration that the campaign center , the city of alexandria and the alexandria city public schools system formed about 37 years ago . 
ahs serves over 250 head start children and because of a wonderful group of dedicated educators and involved parents , these children are truly getting a `` head start. '' i am pleased that many of my low-income constituents are served by head start programs . 
i am concerned , however , that the school readiness act 's authorized funding levels , with limitations , will allow less than one-half of the eligible preschoolers , to participate in head start . 
unfortunately the cost of the iraq war and massive tax cuts have produced a fiscal crisis which now translates into the under-funding of critical programs like head start and others focused on our low-income citizens . 
i am saddened that so many children , who truly would benefit from participation in a head start program , will not be given a chance of doing so , and as a result , will be far less likely to reach their true potential . 
another area of concern in this bill relates to teacher quality . 
the school readiness act will require that half of the head start teachers nationwide have at least a b.a . 
in child development or a related field by 2011 , and that all new teachers , beginning three years after the enactment of the bill have at least an associate 's degree or be enrolled in a program to achieve an associate 's degree . 
why would someone who is interested in being a teacher and possesses the education and background the bill requires , choose to make $ 25 , 000 a year as a head start teacher instead of $ 41 , 000 as a kindergarten teacher for a school system that provides its teaches with cost-of-living adjustments ? 
head start teachers and workers not only provide cognitive development services to children ; they help in the development of children 's character . 
most preschoolers have a strong sense of right from wrong . 
this will be setting a confusing example if we authorize discrimination of any kind . 
it was once said that `` education is the great equalizer in a democratic society , and if people are not given access to a quality education , then what we are doing is creating an underclass of people who will ultimately challenge our very way of life. '' while i recognize the shortcomings of the school readiness act , it is a worthwhile effort that will help our low-income children by working to level a very un-level playing field , so they will be prepared and successful in school . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of the school readiness act which will reauthorize the head start program , but this measure will not get my vote if the amendment allowing for religious discrimination is adopted by this house . 
as a former mayor of the city of alexandria , virginia , i know just how important head start programs are to communities . 
they help to provide our low-income preschool-aged children much needed services in the area of child development . 
in addition to the educational services that are provided by head start programs , some of the other services include health screenings , such as dental and eye care . 
in my congressional district , one of the most successful head start programs is the alexandria head start . 
this is a collaboration that the campagna center , the city of alexandria and the alexandria city public schools system formed about 37 years ago . 
ahs serves over 250 head start children and because of a wonderful group of dedicated educators and involved parents , these children are truly getting a `` head start. '' . 
i am pleased that many of my low-income constituents are served by head start programs . 
i am concerned , however , that the school readiness act 's authorized funding levels , with limitations , will allow less than one-half of the eligible preschoolers to participate in head start . 
unfortunately the cost of the iraq war and massive tax cuts have produced a fiscal crisis which now translates into the under-funding of critical programs like head start and others focused on our low-income citizens . 
i am saddened that so many children , who truly would benefit from participation in a head start program , will not be given a chance of doing so , and as a result , will be far less likely to reach their true potential . 
another area of concern in this bill relates to teacher quality . 
the school readiness act will require that half of the head start teachers nationwide have at least a b.a . 
in child development or a related field by 2011 , and that all new teachers , beginning three years after the enactment of bill have at least an associate 's degree or be enrolled in a program to achieve an associate 's degree . 
why would someone who is interested in being a teacher and possesses the education and background the bill requires , choose to make $ 25 , 000 a year as a head start teacher instead of $ 41 , 000 as a kindergarten teacher for a school system that provides its teachers with cost-of-living adjustments ? 
head start teachers and workers not only provide cognitive development services to children ; they help in the development of just as importantly , they aid them in their character development skills . 
most preschoolers have a strong sense of right from wrong . 
this will be setting a confusing example if we authorize discrimination of any kind . 
it was once said that `` education is the great equalizer in a democratic society , and if people are not given access to a quality education , then what we are doing is creating an underclass of people who will ultimately challenge our very way of life. '' while i recognize the shortcomings of the school readiness act , it is a worthwhile effort that will help our low-income children by working to level a very un-level playing field , so they will be prepared and successful in school . 
first of all , i want to commend the chairman on the good work that he did . 
while the vast majority of head start programs are of very high quality , i have been concerned about recent reports of mismanagement in some of the head start programs . 
it would allow a for-profit agency that can demonstrate that it can provide a higher level of services for the same number of head start children at a lower cost , to keep a small portion of the administration 's savings as profit . 
i would also like to point out that for-profit entities are already an allowable grantee under current law , as well as h.r. 2123 , so we would not be setting a new precedent in terms of for-profit participation in the program . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
this amendment betrays our core values by permitting , for the first time in the history of the head start program , religious discrimination in hiring . 
it allows taxpayer funds to be used in head start programs that discriminate against teachers and parent volunteers solely because of their religious beliefs . 
the bill does so by eliminating existing law that has , since head start 's beginning , protected the people who teach our children against this most reprehensible form of discrimination . 
religious discrimination in employment or the imposition of religious tests for federally funded employment in violation of the constitution is reprehensible and an affront to our first freedom . 
we have heard terrible allegations from the other side of the aisle , and from the administration alleging , during the recent confirmation hearings for judge roberts , that certain members of the other body have hung a sign on the federal courts saying `` no catholics need apply. '' while i continue to believe that this slur against conscientious catholic members of the other body is blatantly false and slanderous , those making the charge , including the president and our colleagues on the other side of the aisle , seem to understand that religious discrimination in employment , or the imposition of a religious test for federally funded employment in violation of the constitution , is reprehensible and an affront to our first freedom . 
instead of promoting religious discrimination , we should be standing up for families and for our most vulnerable children by providing the necessary resources and accountability , to ensure that all children who qualify for the head start program can participate and succeed . 
it is time to make good on the promise of this nation that we are all created equal , that all children are entitled to a decent education , and that no one should ever have to decide between a job helping our children and their religious faith . 
that is not what this country is about , and it is not befitting of a nation dedicated to liberty and justice for all . 
i urge my colleagues to reject this amendment , to stand up for our values of religious equality . 
however , as has already been stated , the civil rights act of 1964 , i believe , does explicitly protect the rights of faith-based organizations to exercise their civil liberties and take religion into account in their hiring practices , and i do not know why we seem to continually have trouble assimilating that into our collective body of knowledge here . 
the civil rights act made clear when faith-based groups hire employees on a religious basis , it is an exercise of the groups ' civil liberties . 
i believe one of the major issues here is that faith-based organizations are allowed to maintain and sustain their mission . 
it does not mean that the people that they hire are discriminated against on the basis of what religion they have , what their ethnicity might be ; but rather simply the ability to hire people who share their common beliefs , who share their sense of mission . 
we certainly saw this in the recent rescue mission and aid issues down with hurricane katrina , where a great number of faith-based groups were the most efficient groups that we saw on the ground there . 
people must be hired in a way that they do share a common sense of mission , a common sense of purpose . 
we have mentioned over and over , title vii , civil rights act , 1964 , states specifically , and this is the verbiage , `` this subchapter shall not apply to an employer with respect to the employment of aliens outside any state , or to a religious corporation , association , educational institution , or society , with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporation , association , educational institution , or society of its activities. '' there is no way we can change this . 
if a choir director or a youth director also serves as a head start employee , you certainly should not have to hire somebody that does not sustain the mission of the church . 
mr. speaker , i oppose the rule on the basis of an exclusion of some very pertinent amendments , but i have to respond to what i just heard . 
we support faith-based , but taxpayers should not have their money taken so that one church can say you are not of this religion so you can not work for me . 
how dare anyone say on this floor that we are allowed to separate with federal money , with federal money , the horror of tens of thousands of desperately poor americans trapped in an environment of extreme neglect , abandoned by its government , left behind to fend for themselves without the most basic resources to survive ? 
i am proud that americans have opened their hearts in the wake of this tragedy to lend a helping hand that the government at first refused . 
america believes in giving all of its citizens the resources and opportunities to make a decent life for themselves and their families . 
head start is bringing the buses in before the floodwaters of poverty trap people in a desperate life of illiteracy , unemployment , crumbling homes , dangerous streets , drug addiction , and no hope . 
if we did not know it before , the tragedy of hurricane katrina has reaffirmed that a head start is the very least we owe each other ; so i am pleased that there is bipartisan efforts to put this reauthorization bill together . 
it protects the basic structure of the program . 
but do not separate those of us in this room in saying those are for values and these are not for values . 
we are talking about a very narrow scope of debate here . 
head start programs continue to address the many needs of low-income children and their families . 
in the words of cecile dickey , the former executive director of head start in paterson , new jersey , my home town , and a personal hero of mine , she was there when we started head start in this nation , and she said , `` you can not do anything for the kids without doing something for their parents , too . 
we serve the entire family unit. '' cecile is a perfect example of how head start can turn a family 's life around . 
through head start , cecile learned that looking out for her kids meant looking out for her community , and she became a tremendous advocate for her sons , and for the children of paterson . 
cecile 's four sons , two of whom were head start children , have grown up to be surgeons , engineers , and teachers . 
nationwide , nearly 50 percent of three and four year olds who qualify by their parents ' income have been denied this opportunity in the last few years . 
this program has had tremendous success at improving educational and social outcomes for children , and is a good deal for the country : it costs american taxpayers a little more than $ 6 billion a year , or one third of one percent of the national budget . 
i hope that the house today will vote for this good bipartisan bill , and will vote down any poison pill amendment that will allow hiring and firing on the basis of religious affiliation . 
it will be a shame if all the bipartisan hard work that has gone into crafting this worthy legislation was scuttled by the cynical attempts of a few to codify discrimination into our national laws . 
i urge my colleagues in the house to continue to expand its support of a program that every american can be proud of . 
mr. chairman , i rise in strong support of the school readiness act of 2005 . 
i would like to pay particular attention and highlight a provision of the bill granting greater flexibility to head start programs wanting to provide early head start to children ages birth to 3. a priority goal of the head start program is to reach out and assist as many of our nation 's at-risk children as possible in the most effective and responsible manner possible . 
in continuing with this tradition , i was proud to join with my distinguished colleagues , the gentlewoman from illinois ( mrs. biggert ) xz4000270 and the gentleman from maryland ( mr. van hollen ) xz4004150 , in offering a bipartisan amendment during committee consideration of this measure meant to reach out and serve at-risk children at an age when brain development is occurring rapidly and is perhaps in its most critical phase . 
as many as 75 percent of children enter the head start program with vocabulary skills below the average range , and 82 percent of these children start out with early writing skills below the average range . 
yet early head start currently serves less than 5 percent of eligible infants and toddlers . 
a major study of the early head start program by mathematica policy research and columbia university found that 3-year-old head start children performed significantly better on a range of measures of cognitive , language , and social and emotional development than a control group . 
in addition , the parents of these children scored significantly higher than control group parents on many aspects of parenting and the home environment . 
early education programs are clearly important to the future of our nation and our nation 's children . 
they have the ability to influence the course of young children 's lives in a positive way . 
i hope my colleagues in this chamber will join me in supporting final passage of h.r. 2123 . 
stories of corrupt agencies have been surfacing recently all over the nation , complete with allegations of administrators ' misconduct with federal funds and financial conflicts of interest between board members and vendors . 
accountability is a critical component of this reauthorization , and i thank the chairman for his commitment for addressing it . 
on february 10 of this year , i introduced h.r. 778 , the head start accountability act of 2005 , to address the misuse and abuse of federal funds occurring in an agency in my district as well as others . 
pcoc has displayed an obvious lack of internal controls and , worse , a blatant disregard for its fiduciary responsibilities associated with proper stewardship of federal grant funds . 
there is documented evidence that this organization has misused federal dollars and made several excessive and unnecessary expenditures , including the approval of $ 150 , 000 for repairs to a parking lot , repairs that had a quoted cost of just $ 20 , 000 . 
i could go on and on listing examples of financial mismanagement at this agency . 
among the provisions in h.r. 778 , the bill calls for automatic recompetition of all federal head start federal grants every 5 years , establishes new board requirements , adds tighter fiscal control requirements at the local level . 
mr. chairman , i thank the gentleman for recognizing the importance of these provisions and including the key principles in this reauthorization . 
i look forward to working with my colleague in the future toward further refinement of these accountability measures . 
mr. chairman , i rise in strong support of the school readiness act . 
let me first begin by recognizing the tremendous efforts of my colleagues , the gentleman from ohio ( mr. boehner ) xz4000360 and the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 in crafting a good bill . 
as a former teacher and elementary principal , i am aware of the necessity of a first-rate education and need to ensure that children have adequate skills before entering kindergarten . 
as chairman of the labor-hhs-education subcommittee of the committee on appropriations , funding head start in the amount of $ 6 billion , this bill will achieve a better use of those moneys . 
head start strongly emphasizes the involvement of families in the local community to ensure that the programs are responsive to the unique needs of each community . 
as you know , in the aftermath of hurricane katrina , the head start bureau has urged all of its grantees to provide head start services to any displaced children and families now in their communities . 
consistent with the goal of strengthening this program , h.r. 2123 will help to eliminate financial mismanagement by increasing the competitive nature of the current program . 
and this is a terrible waste of human resources . 
the problems of dropouts and illiteracy do not begin in high school . 
mr. chairman , after years of hard work on both sides of the aisle to create a head start reauthorization bill that treats our nation 's neediest children fairly , it is with a heavy heart that i must oppose the final passage of h.r. 2123 . 
head start is designed to ensure that all children -- regardless of their family 's income , race , or ethnic background -- are able to enter kindergarten ready to learn . 
the boustany amendment , which promotes discrimination on the basis of religion for faith-based organizations , destroys the principle of fairness that i believe is central and crucial to the success of head start . 
it is for this reason that i can not support final passage of the bill . 
i have long been a supporter of the head start program because each and every year i witness the dramatic positive impact that early intervention services have on children 's lives in my congressional district . 
my district includes many children who are in desperate need of head start services , especially those hispanic children who depend on head start services to learn critical early literacy skills . 
these skills are doubly important now to meet the rigorous requirements of the no child left behind act . 
latino children currently make up more than one-third of all eligible head start children , and the los angeles county office of education is home to the largest head start program in the nation , serving more than 24 , 000 children . 
as a member of the appropriations subcommittee on labor , health and human services , and education , i have continuously supported strong and sustained funding for the head start program . 
during consideration in the education and the workforce committee this year , democrats and republicans worked constructively together to improve the delivery of head start services to the target populations . 
the product of this collaborative process was a bill that contained several forward-looking provisions that would help the overall administration and accountability of the program . 
in particular , i highlight the reauthorization bill 's provisions to ensure that head start teachers possess at least an associate 's degree in early childhood education within three years of the bill 's enactment . 
in addition , i applaud the provision that would allocate 5 percent of total funds toward programs that support the children of migrant and seasonal workers , an easily-overlooked populace that is disproportionately latino . 
it is important to note that i and my fellow democrats recognize and appreciate the wonderful work that faith-based organizations do to support the mission of head start . 
faith-based groups have and should continue to play a critical and respected role in the education of our nation 's youngsters . 
while the participation of faith-based groups is respected and valuable , however , the boustany amendment would seriously damage the mission of head start , which is to `` level the playing field '' when it comes to early childhood education . 
it is essential that faith-based groups respect the civil rights of the thousands of head start teachers and volunteers who are committed to improving the lives of children , regardless of their personal religious beliefs . 
in fact , many religious organizations specifically oppose discrimination in hiring based on religion , including : american jewish congress , church women united , interfaith alliance/foundation , union for reform judaism , unitarian universalist association of congregations , and united church of christ justice & amp ; witness ministries . 
i can only hope that the republican leadership will come to its senses during the conference of this bill with the senate and move to eliminate this discriminatory provision so that head start can once again go forward with the universal support that it has earned and that it deserves . 
i am pleased to rise to join with my colleagues about the future of head start . 
as congressman and a former county executive , education is one of my top priorities . 
in particular , head start programs are essential to so many children 's futures , for research shows that early learning is a fundamental piece of a child 's education . 
i have long held a firm belief in the importance of education and have often spoke of our nation 's need to ensure that , even at the earliest stages our children have access to programs and services that will enrich their education and lives . 
head start also provides the youngsters and their families with a comprehensive list of support services -- from health screenings to nutritional advice to parent counseling . 
religious organizations operate over 5 percent of all head start programs , abiding by the civil rights provisions , and there is no need for congress to take this unprecedented step that mr. boustany xz4006360 is proposing . 
never before has congress ever repealed existing civil rights protections by adopting an amendment on the house floor , without the benefit of committee hearings , debate , or expert testimony . 
now , some members of congress are attempting to sabotage this bill by attaching this unconstitutional , divisive amendment to it . 
republicans are trying to make us choose between early childcare for our neediest students and civil rights protections for the rest of our citizens . 
it is truly a shame that members of this house are playing politics with a bill that affects millions of our young children , and which millions of americans have come to trust and rely on . 
it is unconscionable that members of congress would try to reverse the progress that we have made on civil rights in this country . 
what message are we sending to the rest of the world , including the newly-established democracies struggling to find a balance between religious freedom and civil liberties in their own laws and constitutions ? 
this is just another example of where the republican leadership wants to take our country , and i hope all our citizens are watching carefully . 
mr. chairman , i rise today in support of the head start program and the great opportunities that it provides to children , parents , and families in america . 
head start opened up a new world , not only for me , but also for the rest of my family . 
to maintain the integrity of head start , i would urge my colleagues to pay special attention to two key votes . 
my colleague from indiana ( mr. souder ) xz4003850 will be offering an amendment to restore the joint governance structure of head start and to allow policy councils made up of parents and community members to approve or disapprove program plans and operation activities , along with the board of directors . 
on the other hand , i urge the house to oppose the amendment that would allow faith-based head start programs to use federal tax dollars to discriminate against teachers and employees solely on the basis of their religion . 
first of all , faith-based organizations sponsor head start programs now . 
this discussion really represents a profound change in civil rights discussions , because there was a time traditionally if an employer had a problem with somebody 's religion , the employer has a problem because the weight of the federal government would come down supporting the victim . 
there used to be a time when parents would have to describe to their children why they could not eat at the lunch counter , why they had to sit in the back of the bus , why they could not get a job at certain firms . 
the victim needs to be protected and the weight of the federal government will fall down on the side of the victim . 
and we are discussing where should the weight of the government be , with the victim or with somebody trying to discriminate . 
we should not give students of head start the idea that their parents were denied a federally funded job solely because of their religion . 
we have heard of the supreme court . 
all of the supreme court decisions have said it is okay for a church to discriminate in employment with church money . 
we have heard of our forefathers in 1964 . 
dear member of congress : i have become aware that an amendment has been offered by rep . 
boustany ( r-la ) to the head start bill on the house floor today that would give faith-based organizations providing head start services the right to discriminate with federal funds against employees who are of different faiths . 
as the state president of the louisiana head start association , i strongly oppose such an amendment . 
it is a sad day when members of congress try to manipulate compassion evoked by the national tragedy in my state of louisiana caused by katrina to pass a civil rights repeal in head start or jeopardize the passage of this law so important to the children of my state and our nation . 
my state 's religiously affiliated providers are more than capable and willing to honor the civil rights requirements of the head start program . 
tens of thousands of at-risk 3- and 4-year-old children currently in head start could lose their teachers -- who often are the most important adults to whom they have bonded , other than their parents -- not because those teachers are doing a bad job , but because they are the `` wrong '' religion . 
as the state president of the louisiana head start association , i urge you to reject the boustany amendment to allow discrimination in head start . 
such a provision is incompatible with the mission of this program . 
landry parish head start program , state president of the louisiana head start association . 
dear chairman boehner and ranking member miller : on behalf of the more than 2.5 million children and families , program staff and volunteers that comprise the head start and early head start community , we are writing to you today to address certain issues regarding the reauthorization of the head start act . 
we appreciate the bi-partisan spirit that has occurred throughout this crafting of the reauthorization bill . 
h.r. 2123 does not contain the controversial block grant proposal of the 108th congress and maintains the crucial comprehensive services of the head start program performance standards . 
we applaud a number of measures and improvements incorporated into this bill , such as enhanced homeless outreach ; greater set asides for migrant and seasonal workers and native americans , as well as early head start programs ; and the addition of a `` seamless service '' provision that allows programs to convert head start slots to early head start slots under certain circumstances . 
we also acknowledge that the teacher requirements are based on national goals and that training and technical assistance is funded at two percent , with 50 percent of that amount going directly to programs . 
while we generally are pleased with the overall intent and direction of h.r. 2123 , we do have continuing concerns about certain specific provisions that we hope that can be resolved before the bill is enacted into law . 
while we strongly agree that programs that are not providing high quality services should have to recompete for head start funds , we are concerned that the language in this section may force more programs -- regardless of quality -- to undergo recompetition . 
yet , we also believe that programs that are providing high quality services should not be put in the position of recompeting every five years , as this instability makes it difficult for them to recruit and retain the best teachers , to invest in facilities , and to create lasting partnerships with other community agencies . 
while we appreciate the efforts to make the recompetition process fair , there remains a very long list of tests that must be met to determine the priority status of programs . 
we continue to have concerns that some of these tests could be evaluated in an arbitrary manner , throwing programs into a recompete status , regardless of their performance . 
to achieve this , we would prefer that there be more limited parameters to determine the need to recompete a grantee , such as programs that have unresolved areas of noncompliance . 
additionally , educational levels among head start teachers have increased appreciably since the 1998 congressional mandate to increase the proportion of head start teachers with an a.a . 
fifty-seven percent of head start teachers had at least an a.a . 
degree in 2003 , exceeding a congressional mandate that 50 percent of head start teachers in center-based classrooms attain an a.a . 
fifty-eight percent of head start teachers without a degree or credential were enrolled in an early childhood education or related degree program , and 18 percent were in child development associate ( cda ) or equivalent training . 
the 1998 law required that , when funding for the program increased , a certain percentage of new dollars would be dedicated to quality . 
however , head start funding has not kept pace with inflation in recent years , so programs no longer have a growing source of funds to help teachers attain degrees . 
while we appreciate the modifications made in committee markup to the provisions regarding the head start parent policy councils , we strongly believe in the integral and shared responsibilities of board members and parents in head start governing bodies . 
the high degree of parental involvement in the head start program has provided a role model for early childhood education for 40 years . 
the head start community is fully committed to restoration of the current level of authority to parent policy councils . 
the nrs , a pre- and post-test for head start children , is not a valid measurement of program impact and should not be used in this manner . 
because head start serves children with very high level needs , using this kind of measure to evaluate programs may well penalize those programs serving the children with the greatest needs . 
additionally , we know that the head start bureau is spending more than $ 21 million annually on the nrs , an expenditure that does not even begin to take into consideration the costs of preparing for and administering the test at the program level . 
we ask the house of representatives to suspend further use of and expenditures for the nrs until the national academy of sciences can make the test scientifically valid . 
the process and planning that is required of program administrators for a full prism review can not be performed overnight . 
nhsa believes that a minimum of 30 days notice should be required of the head start bureau before full prism reviews . 
h.r. 2123 limits the ability of parents and staff to travel in order to receive specialized training and career development at national conferences . 
this is an unnecessary provision that will cause confusion for program administrators since the existing grant application process requires justification of all training . 
h.r. 2123 does not require input as it should , and as is now required , from state head start officials in the process of selecting staff who will have coordination responsibilities . 
the head start community believes that state head start associations should have sign-off on candidates for state collaboration officers , as well as continuing involvement in the planning and implementation of state plans . 
the head start community , including a number of programs administered by religious organizations , strongly opposes any effort by this administration to encourage religious discrimination in hiring practices for head start or any federally-funded program . 
freedom of religion , a cornerstone of this great nation , should be sacrosanct to all of us . 
it is incomprehensible that the u.s. congress would tamper with the ability of its citizens to practice their faith by using the threat of employment discrimination . 
in spite of its positive provisions , if h.r. 2123 contains a religious discrimination amendment , we must reluctantly oppose the bill . 
dear member of congress : as pastors and leaders of predominately african american congregations across the country , we urge you to stand up for the civil rights and religious freedom of all americans , and to maintain the bipartisan direction of the school readiness act ( h.r. 2123 ) by opposing any attempt to repeal longstanding critical civil rights protections on the house floor . 
we have continually supported these provisions because this is consistent with our commitment to protecting the as religious figures we provide leadership grounded by theological interpretations of scripture , and focus on issues of concern to our parishioners and our community . 
we agree that religious organizations participating in the head start program make an invaluable contribution to the education of thousands of students in minority communities in particular , but do not agree that discriminating against persons based upon their religion is necessary or desirable in order to provide these much needed services . 
in light of this statement , we are asking members to oppose this amendment and not support the head start bill if the anti-discrimination provisions are removed . 
as leaders of our respective congregations we are committed to providing much needed services in our communities and have done so by respecting the rights of all individuals . 
we urge you to maintain the bipartisan direction of the school readiness act ( h.r. 2123 ) and to not support any agreement that allows for an assault on civil rights protections in federally-funded programs , especially a program as critical as head start . 
this could destroy the mutually supported nature of the head start program in which the education of young children -- especially minority children -- is so dependent upon parental participation and on ongoing , close relationships with head start teachers . 
uplifting our surrounding community does not require the concurrent advancement of government funded discrimination . 
dear representative : on behalf of the anti-defamation league , we write to urge you to maintain the civil rights protections currently included in the house education and the workforce-approved version of the school readiness act ( h.r. 2123 ) -- and to oppose any efforts to repeal these important provisions . 
since 1972 , agencies that receive government funding for head start -- including religious organizations and houses of worship that host head start programs -- have been prohibited from discriminating on the basis of religion when hiring or firing staff within the federally-funded program . 
these existing non-discrimination requirements have a history of bipartisan support , and were originally signed into law by president richard nixon . 
for 33 years , these fundamental non-discrimination protections have worked well , allowing thousands of head start programs in communities throughout the country to flourish while maintaining constitutional and civil rights safeguards against religious tests for employment in federally-funded programs . 
we have great appreciation for the vital role religious institutions have historically played in addressing many of our nation 's most pressing social needs , as a critical complement to government-funded programs . 
sincerely , & lt ; center & gt ; michael lieberman , & lt ; /center & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; washington counsel. & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; jess n. hordes , & lt ; /center & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; washington director. & lt ; /em & gt ; american federation of state , county and municipal employees , afl-cio , washington , dc , september 20 , 2005 . 
dear representative : on behalf of the 1.4 million members of the american federation of state , county and municipal employees ( afscme ) , i am writing with respect to certain provisions of h.r. 2123 which would reauthorize the head start program . 
we want to express our sincere appreciation for the bi-partisan and inclusive process that resulted in unanimous approval of the legislation at the committee level . 
rather , h.r. 2123 respects and maintains the crucial comprehensive services of the program performance standards that long have marked head start as a program of distinction . 
we believe that h.r. 2123 , with some changes , has the very real potential to build upon the success of head start for future generations . 
however , we are concerned that this bill does not address the low pay offered to head start teachers and staff and the lack of financial assistance in meeting new and more rigorous educational requirements . 
we support h.r. 2123 's focus on raising standards for head start teachers , including the provision calling for 50 percent of all current head start teachers to have a bachelor 's degree within five years and all new head start teachers to have an associate 's degree . 
however , the estimated cost of the additional education for half of all head start teachers to earn bachelor 's degrees by 2008 is approximately $ 2 billion over five years . 
we know that the qualifications of early childhood educators matter because high quality early education improves outcomes for children and delivers benefits to the community that far outweigh the costs . 
but it is especially egregious given that the civil rights protections in head start are an integral part of its mission to provide families a ladder out of poverty by encouraging parents to become volunteers and then teachers . 
denying a parent economic opportunity because of the religion he/she practices violates the principles upon which our country was founded . 
dear representative : on behalf of the leadership conference on civil rights ( lccr ) , the nation 's oldest , largest , and most diverse civil and human rights coalition , with more than 190 member organizations , we urge you to oppose the boehner amendment or any amendment to the school readiness act ( h.r. 2123 ) that would repeal longstanding civil rights protections in the head start program that have been in place since president nixon signed the law in 1972 . 
if language repealing civil rights protections is added to the bill during consideration on the house floor , we urge you to oppose final passage of h.r. 2123 . 
there also is no controversy over the exemption under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 that allows religious organizations to have a preference of hiring co-religionists when they are using private funds , but federal funds may not be used to discriminate . 
see corporation of presiding bishop of church of jesus christ of latter day saints v. amos , 483 u.s. 327 ( 1987 ) . 
we believe , based on analysis of amos , that if federal funds are used by religious organizations to hire only persons of their own faith , then the federal government is affirmatively acting to advance employment discrimination . 
any attempt to allow organizations to discriminate on the basis of religion with federal funds would drastically impede that progress and erode a longstanding principle of our nation 's civil rights policy : that federal civil rights obligations follow federal dollars , regardless of who receives them . 
the leading case on the question of government-aided discrimination is norwood v. harrison , 413 u.s. 455 ( 1973 ) . 
the principles set out in norwood were affirmed in justice o'connor 's opinion in city of richmond v. j.a . 
boehner 's amendment because current law must not be changed to allow recipients of head start funds to have an explicit statutory right to engage in employment discrimination . 
if this amendment passes , or other language is added during floor consideration that repeals current law , lccr urges you to oppose final passage of h.r. 2123 . 
sincerely , & lt ; center & gt ; wade henderson , & lt ; /center & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; executive director. & lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; nancy zirkin , & lt ; /center & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; deputy director. & lt ; /em & gt ; washington bureau , national association for the advancement of colored people , washington , dc , september 19 , 2005 . 
dear member : on behalf of the national association for the advancement of colored people ( naacp ) , our nation 's oldest , largest and most widely recognized grassroots civil rights organization , i am writing today to urge you to do all you can to ensure that the longstanding , critical civil rights protections that are contained in the current version of h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act , are retained during consideration by the full house of representatives . 
specifically , i urge you to reject and work against the anticipated boehner amendment , which will repeal existing , long-standing head start provisions that prohibit religious organizations and churches from discriminating on the basis of religion when hiring or firing staff from positions within this federally-funded program . 
the twenty-four year old civil rights provision has worked well since the inception of this program , allowing religious organizations to participate in programs while maintaining constitutional and civil rights standards . 
the naacp both recognizes and celebrates that religious organizations participating in the head start program have made and continue to make an invaluable contribution to the education of thousands of students . 
however , if the repeal of the existing civil rights protections were to become law , teachers or parent volunteers working in any head start program run by a religious organization could immediately lose their jobs because of their religion . 
the naacp strongly believes that allowing discrimination based on religion thus , i urge you again , in the strongest terms possible , to support the continued inclusion of these longstanding and critical civil rights protections . 
should you have any questions about the naacp position or if there is any way in which i can be of help to you as you move this reauthorization through the legislative process , i hope that you will feel free to contact me . 
thank you very much for you attention to the views of the naacp . 
dear representative : on behalf of the american jewish committee , the nation 's oldest human relations organization , with 33 chapters nationwide representing over 150 , 000 members and supporters , i urge you to oppose any amendments to the school readiness act , h.r. 2123 , that roll back crucial civil rights safeguards . 
further , if such an amendment is adopted , i urge you to oppose passage of h.r. 2123 ; repealing this longstanding essential element of head start could subject teachers in these federally-funded programs to religious discrimination . 
as passed out of the house education and the workforce committee , the bill maintains three-decade-old provisions that prohibit various forms of employment discrimination in head start . 
both religious and secular organizations have operated effectively under this system since it passed as part of bipartisan legislation passed during the 9th congress . 
ever since president richard nixon signed the legislation into law in 1972 , religion-based and other forms of discrimination are prohibited in head start programs , thereby ensuring that taxpayer dollars do not underwrite positions for which religion is a factor in hiring decisions . 
at the same time , the existing provisions do not intrude on the autonomy of religious organizations with respect to hiring decisions made in purely private programs . 
the efforts of the house education and the workforce committee to produce a bipartisan package are to be commended . 
however , the bill risks losing critical segments of this support if , at any point , this initiative is amended to roll back head start 's longstanding civil rights protections by exempting religious organizations from the prohibition on religious discrimination in employment decisions . 
while many of the religious organizations that deliver the program would , no doubt , continue to hire employees for head start programs without regard to religion , h.r. 2123 could jeopardize the jobs of many thousands of current and potential teachers , staff , and parent volunteers for belonging to the `` wrong '' religion , as well as jeopardize children for whom a stable and trusting relationship between teacher and child is so important . 
for these reasons , we strongly urge you to oppose any attempts to roll back the vital civil rights protections of h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act . 
respectfully , richard t. foltin , of church and state , washington , dc , september 19 , 2005 . 
dear representative : americans united for separation of church and state urges you to oppose any amendment to repeal longstanding , critical civil rights protections contained in the school readiness act ( h.r. 2123 ) and to vote `` no '' on final passage of the bill if such an amendment is adopted . 
americans united represents more than 75 , 000 individual members throughout the fifty states , 9500 clergy nationwide , as well as cooperating houses of worship and other religious bodies committed to the preservation of religious liberty . 
h.r. 2123 unanimously passed out of the committee on education and the workforce on may 18 , 2005 , maintaining a longstanding civil rights provision designed to protect over 198 , 000 head start teachers and staff and over 1 , 450 , 000 parent volunteers from employment discrimination based on religion in federally-funded head start programs . 
we recognize that religious organizations participating in the head start program make an invaluable contribution to the education of thousands of children . 
however , if the repeal of the existing civil rights protection were to become law , teachers or parent volunteers working in any head start program run by a religious organization could immediately lose their jobs simply because of their religion or religious beliefs . 
this would directly work against the stated goals of head start and could change the fundamental character of this tremendously successful program . 
the parents and communities that rely on head start programs should not have to choose between the renewal of the head start program and longstanding civil rights protections that are a cornerstone of this invaluable program . 
we hope that the house will continue the bipartisan goal of reauthorizing our nation 's head start programs and reject any attempts to roll back the civil rights protections long afforded to head start teachers and staff . 
if you have any questions about h.r. 2123 or would like further information on any other issue of importance to americans united , please contact aaron d. schuham , legislative director . 
dear representative , the school readiness act of 2005 ( h.r. 2123 ) will soon be considered in the house . 
the current bill , passed out of committee with unanimous approval , maintains these important protections . 
we ask you to oppose any such amendment and to oppose final passage of the bill if the amendment were to pass . 
a recent hearing in the subcommittee on criminal justice , drug policy and human resources examining the faith-based initiative demonstrated once again that employment discrimination with federal dollars is one of the initiative 's most controversial and divisive elements . 
testimony indicated that the continued pursuit of such a rule change is often more about politics than good policy . 
we support these efforts and recognize the importance of government and religious cooperation generally . 
such cooperation has occurred for many years without the danger of government sponsored religious discrimination that is present in the proposed amendment . 
it would be extremely unwise to allow such a dramatic change in policy to threaten the reauthorization of head start . 
as unanimously passed out of the committee on education and the workforce , h.r. 2123 maintains longstanding provisions designed to protect over 198 , 000 head start teachers and staff and over 1 , 450 , 000 parent volunteers from employment discrimination based on religion in federally-funded positions in head start programs . 
however , we are troubled by the threat of repealing these protections on the house floor . 
throughout its 33-year history , the civil rights provision has not been an obstacle to the participation of religiously-affiliated organizations in head start programs . 
the proposed amendment to h.r. 2123 would reverse the government 's long fight against federally-funded discrimination repealing critical civil rights protections in head start attacks the very core of civil rights protections historically supported by the federal government . 
more than 60 years ago , the first success of the modern civil rights movement was a decision by president franklin roosevelt to bar federal contractors from discriminating based on race , religion , or national origin . 
from that first presidential decision through the supreme court 's decision allowing the federal government to deny special tax advantages to bob jones university , which claimed a religious right to retain the tax benefits while pursuing racist practices , the federal government has made the eradication of federally-funded discrimination among its highest priorities . 
in a disturbing result , bob jones university could be denied tax benefits because of its racist policies toward its students , but could receive federal head start money under h.r. 2123 to discriminate against teachers and parent volunteers working in head start classrooms -- simply because the employees do not meet bob jones university 's religious tests . 
moreover , in the many religious organizations in which the adherents are all of a single race , the result of federally-funded religious discrimination will effectively be federal funds going to the employment of persons of a single race . 
the federal government clearly has a compelling interest in applying the head start act 's civil rights provision to everyone receiving federal funds -- including religious organizations seeking to discriminate on the basis of religion in hiring persons to work in head start . 
repealing critical civil rights protections prohibiting discrimination in employment would be inconsistent with the leading supreme court case on the use of federal funds by religious organizations that discriminate . 
the court decided that the federal government 's compelling interest in eradicating racial discrimination in education superceded any burden on the university 's religious exercise of enforcing a religiously-motivated ban on students interracial dating . 
in its october 26 , 2001 brief defending the religion prong of title vii from an eleventh amendment attack , the united states stated that `` [ c ] ontrary to defendant 's contention that the supreme court has `distinguished claims involving differential treatment on the basis of race and speech from those involving religion , ' there can be no doubt that the equal protection clause subjects state governments engaging in intentional discrimination on the basis of religion to strict scrutiny. '' brief of intervenor united states in endres v. indiana state police ( n.d . 
the proposed amendment 's exemption of religious organizations from the prohibition on religious discrimination in the program is contrary to constitutional law , and will open the door to government-funded discrimination . 
proponents of allowing religious organizations to use federal funds to discriminate against their employees argue that their position is consistent with a provision in title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 that generally permits religious organizations to prefer members of their own religion when making employment decisions . 
moreover , although the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of the religious organization exemption in title vii , corporation of presiding bishop v. amos , 483 u.s. 327 , 336-39 ( 1987 ) , the court has never considered whether it is unconstitutional for a religious organization to discriminate based on religion when making employment several courts have considered whether a religious organization can retain its title vii exemption after receipt of indirect federal funds , e.g. , siegel v. truett-mcconnell college , inc. , 13 f. supp.2d 1335 , 1344 ( n.d . 
1994 ) ( clarifying that its decision permitting a religious university to invoke the title vii exemption is because the government aid is directed to the students rather than the employer ) , but only one federal court has decided the constitutionality of retaining the title vii exemption after receipt of direct federal funds , dodge v. salvation army , 1989 wl 53857 ( s.d . 
in that decision , the court held that the religious employer 's claim of its title vii exemption for a position `` substantially , if not exclusively '' funded with government money in addition to causing the establishment clause violation cited by the court in dodge , h.r. 2210 would also subject the government and any religious employer invoking the right to discriminate with federal dollars to liability for violation of constitutional rights under the free exercise clause and the equal protection clause . 
although mere receipt of government funds is insufficient to trigger constitutional obligations on private persons , a close nexus between the government and the private person 's activity can result in the courts treating the private person as a state actor . 
it is beyond question that the government itself can not prefer members of a particular religion to work in a federally-funded program . 
the equal protection clause subjects governments engaging in intentional discrimination on the basis of religion to strict scrutiny . 
e.g. , united states v. batchelder , 442 u.s. 114 , 125 n.9 ( 1979 ) ; city of new orleans v. dukes , 427 u.s. 297 , 303 ( 1976 ) . 
thus , the government would be in violation of the free exercise clause and the equal protection clause for knowingly funding religious discrimination . 
of course , a private organization is not subject to the requirements of the free exercise clause and the equal protection clause unless the organization is considered a state actor for a specific purpose . 
the supreme court recently explained when there is a sufficient nexus between the government and the private person to find that the private person is a state actor for purposes of compliance with constitutional requirements on certain decisions made by participants in the government program : [ s ] tate action may be found if , though only if , there is such a `close nexus between the state and the challenged action ' that seemingly private behavior `may be fairly treated as that of the state itself. ' ... .. 
we have , for example , held that a challenged activity may be state action when it results from the state 's exercise of `coercive power , ' when the state provides `significant encouragement , either overt or covert , ' or when a private actor operates as a `willful participant in joint activity with the state or its agents ' . 
the clear intent of this amendment to repeal the civil rights provision in the head start act is to encourage certain providers receiving federal funds to discriminate based on religion . 
the proposed amendment to h.r. 2123 provision allowing federally-funded religious discrimination is part of a growing pattern of congressional , presidential , and regulatory actions taken specifically for the purpose of accommodating , fostering , and encouraging federally-funded private organizations to discriminate in ways that would unquestionably be unconstitutional if engaged in by the federal government itself . 
for example , in december of 2002 , president bush signed executive order 13279 , which amended an earlier executive order , which had provided more than 60 years of protection against discrimination based on religion by federal contractors . 
the bush order provides an exemption for religious organizations contracting with the government to discriminate in employment although religious employers have the right under title vii to apply religious tests to employees , the constitution requires that direct receipt and administration of federal funds removes that exemption . 
h.r. 2123 , if amended , would fail to meet any of those constitutional mandates . 
national league of cities , washington , dc , september 21 , 2005 . 
dear committee member : on behalf of the 18 , 000 cities represented by the national league of cities ( nlc ) , i want to commend members of the education and workforce committee on the passage of bipartisan head start legislation , h.r. 2123 , the `` school readiness act of 2005. '' head start is critical to helping to alleviate the plight of children of the working poor . 
as you know , local governments have a long and rich history of working with faith-based organizations that predates the enactment of the charitable choice provision contained in the welfare-to-work act of 1996 . 
nlc is especially proud of the fact that cities across the nation have carefully helped faith-based groups deliver services to our constituents while respecting the boundaries of our constitution . 
simply put , any language that preempts local governments from protecting its residents from employment discrimination undermines the spirit and letter of title vii of the civil rights act and unnecessarily encourages litigation against municipalities . 
nlc asks members of the house of representatives to maintain the committee 's bipartisan direction and oppose any attempts to repeal longstanding anti-discrimination protections during deliberation on the house floor . 
dear representative : on behalf of the national education association 's ( nea ) 2.7 million members , we would like to offer our views on the school readiness act of 2005 ( h.r. 2123 ) , scheduled for floor debate this week . 
overall , we believe the bill contains a number of positive provisions . 
head start has a long history of success in this arena , having provided high-quality early childhood education , health , social services , and parental involvement programs to more than 18.5 million low-income children between the ages of 3 and 5 since its creation in 1964 . 
given the critical importance of head start , we are particularly pleased that h.r. 2123 does not allow for block granting of head start funds to states . 
we are also pleased that the bill would align head start curricula with k-12 education while preserving the comprehensive nature of the head start program . 
at the same time , the proposal will provide continuity for children by retaining the essential parental involvement , nutrition , and other nonacademic features of head start . 
we do have some concerns with portions of h.r. 2123 as drafted as well as proposed amendments : civil rights protections . 
we recognize the invaluable contributions of religious organizations participating in head start . 
however , we are deeply concerned that a repeal of civil rights protections could allow religious organizations participating in head start to fire teachers or parent volunteers based on their religion . 
we strongly believe that allowing discrimination based on religion would significantly impede the important goals of head start as well as send a damaging message to students . 
we recommend addressing this concern , including by providing grants to help teachers meet the costs of earning their bachelor 's and associates degrees and/or increasing the salaries of those teachers who earn degrees in early childhood education . 
h.r. 2123 allows a study of , and recommendations on , appropriate assessments for young children . 
we would recommend that the national academy of sciences conduct a review of the national reporting system to ensure that the assessments are comprehensive , reliable , and that the results are used to improve student achievement . 
we thank you for your consideration of our views on these important issues . 
& lt ; center & gt ; diane shust , & lt ; /center & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; director of government relations . 
& lt ; /em & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; randall moody , & lt ; /center & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; manager of federal policy and politics. & lt ; /em & gt ; american humanist association , washington , dc , september 16 , 2005 . 
dear representative : the american humanist association ( aha ) stands in opposition to any retrenchment of existing civil rights protections , and therefore opposes any specific attempt to reverse the nondiscrimination provisions currently in effect in the head start program . 
on behalf of the oldest and largest humanist organization in the nation , i ask you to oppose any such attempt to legalize discrimination with federal funds as you vote on the bipartisan head start reauthorization bill . 
if this 33 year old nondiscrimination policy were discarded , the head start reauthorization would permit religious organizations to use federal funds to discriminate on the basis of religion , even when engaging in purely secular early childhood education activities . 
not only would such a removal of employment discrimination safeguards hold significant potential harm for humanists , jews , muslims , buddhists , and others who hold minority lifestances , it would not address an existing problem . 
as a result , this bill will likely lose the existing support of many religious , civil rights , education , health , and advocacy organizations if congressman boehner 's amendment is adopted . 
as humanists we persistently oppose federal funding for discrimination , especially discrimination done on the basis of religion or lack thereof . 
if such an amendment is added to the bill , we strongly urge you to oppose final passage of the bill . 
as unanimously passed out of the committee on education and the workforce , h.r. 2123 maintains longstanding provisions designed to protect over 198 , 000 head start teachers and staff and over 1 , 450 , 000 parent volunteers from employment discrimination based on religion in federally-funded positions in head start programs . 
the 33 year old civil rights provision has worked effectively since the inception of this program , allowing religious organizations to participate in programs while maintaining constitutional and civil rights standards . 
however , we are troubled by the threat of repealing these protections on the house floor . 
we recognize that religious organizations participating in the head start program make an invaluable contribution to the education of thousands of students . 
however , if the repeal of the existing civil rights protections becomes law , teachers or parent volunteers working in any head start program run by a religious organization could potentially lose their jobs based only on their religion . 
we strongly believe that allowing discrimination based on religion would significantly impede the important goals of head start , send a damaging message to head start students , and harm their we urge you to maintain current law and reject any assault on civil rights protections in federally-funded programs , especially a program as critical as head start . 
if these longstanding critical civil rights protections are repealed we urge you to vote `` no '' on final passage of h.r. 2123 . 
the dismantling of civil rights will destroy the nature of a program in which the education of young children is so dependent on parent participation and on ongoing , close relationships with head start teachers . 
american association of university women . 
american federation of state , county and municipal employees . 
american federation of teachers . 
americans united for separation of church and state . 
central conference of american rabbis . 
communications workers of america . 
disciples justice action network ( disciples of christ ) . 
faith action network of people for the american way . 
general board of church and society of the united methodist church . 
national association of social workers . 
national council of jewish women . 
national council of women 's organizations . 
national organization of women . 
unitarian universalist association of congregations . 
united church of christ justice & amp ; witness ministries . 
women of reform judaism . 
dear representative : i write to you today as the president of the interfaith alliance , a nonpartisan , national grassroots organization dedicated to promoting the positive and healing role of religion in public life to oppose any amendment to repeal longstanding critical civil rights protections contained in the school readiness act ( h.r. 2123 ) and vote `` no '' on final passage if such an amendment is adopted . 
as unanimously passed out of the committee on education and the workforce , h.r. 2123 maintains longstanding provisions designed to protect over 198 , 000 head start teachers and staff and over 1 , 450 , 000 parent volunteers from employment discrimination based on religion in federally funded head start programs , as an organization whose membership is comprised of 150 , 000 people of faith and good will spanning 75 faith traditions , i can think of no reason to justify an attempt to roll back these longstanding civil rights and religious liberty protections . 
indeed , in a nation as intentionally and increasingly pluralistic as ours , built-in protections prohibiting religious discrimination in federally-funded programs represent a fundamental commitment towards a society that values the contributions and abilities of people of all faith traditions equally . 
if those in congress who seek to repeal these employment safeguards are successful , thousands of teachers and parent volunteers who have dedicated themselves to this program could find themselves no longer welcome at religiously-affiliated head start programs because they are of a different faith than the sponsoring organization . 
while the interfaith alliance is supportive of the right of sectarian organizations to hire based on religious preference for purposes of furthering their institutional ministry , we believe that houses of worship forfeit that right once they accept federal taxpayer dollars to implement social service programs that are intended to serve all . 
further , any attempt to politicize the head start program -- a federally sponsored preschool program conceived to meet the needs of disadvantaged children since 1965 -- through a floor amendment to add the highly controversial religious exemption language , is not only unnecessary , but a sad commentary on the state of those political leaders who seek to attach religious exemption language to every social service program that comes before the congress . 
the interfaith alliance is pleased with the bipartisan direction of the head start legislation however ; this bill will no longer be bipartisan if there is any attempt to roll back longstanding critical civil rights protections . 
if you need further information on our position on this matter , please do not hesitate to contact kim baldwin , director of public policy and voter education or preetmohan singh , senior policy analyst , at 202-639-6370 . 
c. welton gaddy , & lt ; /center & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; & lt ; em & gt ; president , the interfaith alliance , pastor of preaching and worship , north minster baptist church ( monroe , la ) . & lt ; /em & gt ; association of congregations , washington , dc , june 1 , 2005 . 
dear member of congress : i am writing on behalf of the over 1 , 050 congregations that make up the unitarian universalist association in regard to h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act of 2005 , the legislation to reauthorize the head start program . 
the unitarian universalist association would like to express our continued support of this program , as we believe that head start is a successful and necessary program that helps prepare nearly 20 million low-income children for success in kindergarten and later life . 
we remain pleased with the general direction of the house bill as it comes out of the committee on education and the workforce . 
the uua encourages you to pass a reauthorization bill that is truly bi-partisan in recognizing the successes of the head start program and maintaining the high quality of comprehensive services it provides without repeal of long-standing civil rights protections . 
if such an amendment is included in the final bill , we ask that you vote no on final passage of h.r. 2123 . 
we urge you to oppose the repeal of longstanding civil rights protections designed to protect head start teachers , staff , and parent volunteers from employment discrimination based on religion in federally funded head start programs . 
allowing discrimination based on religion would significantly impede the important goals of head start , send a damaging message to head start students , and harm their education by separating students from their own teachers and parent volunteers . 
on behalf of the unitarian universalist association of congregations , i thank you for your consideration of our views on head start reauthorization . 
head start is an exemplary program that has a well-deserved reputation for delivering quality services to millions of our country 's children . 
this program is an excellent example of how religious organizations such as houses of worship work in partnership with the government without compromising either protections for religious minorities or the integrity of religious organizations . 
we urge the house to pass a bipartisan bill that will continue the success of head start without eliminating important civil rights provisions by voting no on any proposed amendment eliminating such provisions and voting no on final passage of a bill including such provisions . 
dear representative : on behalf of 1.8 million members of the service employees international union ( seiu ) , working in health care , building services , and federal , state , and local governments , including more than 220 , 000 early education workers throughout the united states , i write to encourage you to take a closer look at several key provisions in the head start reauthorization bill that could impact the quality of head start for children . 
as the school readiness act of 2005 ( h.r. 2123 ) moves to the house floor for a vote this week , we hope that you will use this time as an opportunity to improve the quality of head start programs that serve low-income children nationwide . 
head start provides an array of comprehensive services to low-income parents and children that they may not otherwise have access to on their own . 
however , seiu remains concerned about a number of provisions that may erode the quality of head start programs if not modified . 
additionally , head start needs sufficient resources to ensure every eligible child can participate and to increase the quality of programs . 
two out of five preschool children ( about 800 , 000 ) and 97 percent of infants and toddlers who qualify for early head start can not participate in the program simply because there are not enough resources invested in the program . 
seiu is encouraged that the house bill does not require automatic re-competition for every grantee after the end of their grant period . 
however , the bill does require re-competition for grantees that have a `` deficiency '' during their grant period -- regardless of whether the deficiency has been resolved or not . 
in addition , the secretary has broad authority in identifying what a `` deficiency '' is , the finding of which would require programs to re-compete their grants . 
such uncertainty for all programs -- even those with stellar records of performance -- is counterproductive and would end programs ' ability to do any long-range planning . 
moreover , seiu supports parental involvement in head start programs and encourages members of congress to re-think its plan to diminish the role of policy councils . 
despite the advantages of parental involvement , the house bill changes governance responsibility to the board of directors , with policy councils playing only an advisory or consulting role . 
instead , congress should recognize that parents provide valuable insight into head start programs and can provide the necessary oversight of head start programs when armed with the proper training . 
this decades old civil rights provision has worked effectively since the inception of this program , allowing religious organizations to participate while maintaining constitutional civil and employment protections . 
if such an amendment is included in the final bill , we urge you vote no on final passage of h.r. 2123 . 
again , should an amendment be offered that allows faith-based organizations to use religious discrimination against teachers , staff and parent volunteers working at head start programs , we urge you to vote no upon final passage of the bill . 
dear representative : as h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act of 2005 , moves towards a full vote in the house of representatives on thursday , september 22 , the children 's defense fund is pleased to support many of the provisions on which the education and workforce committee has worked so thoughtfully and diligently . 
we are especially pleased that the committee 's bipartisan bill maintains the integrity of the head start program and the quality performance standards that have helped head start successfully serve over 22 million children since the program began . 
such an amendment would significantly hinder the goals of the head start program and the quality of care children receive . 
cdf acknowledges the continuing contribution of faith-based individuals and organizations , which have been the backbone of head start since its inception and have historically embraced serving our most vulnerable children when few others would even consider it . 
the religious discrimination provision , however , strikes at the very core of civil rights issues that so many of these individuals fought to secure . 
tens of thousands of already at-risk 3- and 4-year-old children could lose their head start teachers , who often are the most important adults , other than their parents , with whom they have established meaningful relationships . 
head start has been an important source of employment for countless parents , but this provision could result in numerous parents losing their jobs , preventing families of head start children from climbing the ladder out of poverty . 
parent involvement has played a critical role in the success of head start . 
while substantial progress has been made creating a bipartisan bill with many positive provisions , the addition of a religious discrimination amendment would require cdf to oppose h.r. 2123 . 
thank you for your continuing commitment to improving head start and helping it reach more of the vulnerable children and families who benefit from its essential services . 
dear representative : on behalf of the more than 600 , 000 members of the human rights campaign , we write to express our grave concerns with certain provisions of the school readiness act ( h.r. 2123 ) that we understand may be added as the legislation moves to the floor for a vote . 
we ask you to oppose any attempt to rollback these civil rights protections , which would undermine the current bipartisan nature of the bill . 
if an amendment is added on the floor which would roll back these civil rights protections , we urge you to oppose final passage of the school readiness act ( h.r. 2123 ) . 
as the nation 's largest gay , lesbian , bisexual and transgender civil rights organization , we oppose using federal funds to discriminate on any basis , including religion , which unfortunately has been used as a proxy for discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity . 
two prominent cases illustrate this problem : bellmore v. united methodist children 's home and department of human resources of georgia and pedreira v. kentucky baptist homes for children . 
by abandoning these non-discrimination protections , head start providers would be able to discriminate on the basis of religion in federally funded positions , even when engaging in purely secular early childhood education activities . 
faith-based organizations have been partnering successfully with the government for a number of years without the need to bypass civil rights laws in their efforts to provide social services . 
just as it is important these vital programs continue to provide services , it also remains important that federal funds are not used to discriminate on the basis of religion or sexual orientation or gender identity . 
dear representative : on behalf of the 90 , 000 members and supporters of the national council of jewish women ( ncjw ) , i am writing to ask you to oppose the boehner amendment to h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act of 2005 , and to oppose final passage of the bill if this amendment is adopted . 
efforts to amend the bill to open the door to religious discrimination would compromise the success of this program . 
house consideration of h.r. 2123 should focus on meeting the needs of disadvantaged children -- improving policy and providing sufficient funds to extend head start to all eligible children . 
the house of representatives must not roll back critical civil rights protections . 
for over a century , ncjw has been at the forefront of social change , raising its voice on important issues of public policy . 
inspired by our jewish values , ncjw has been , and continues to be , an advocate for the needs of women , children , and families and a strong supporter of equal rights and protections for everyone . 
sincerely , phyllis snyder , national council of la raza , washington , dc , september 19 , 2005 . 
dear member of congress : on behalf of the national council of la raza ( nclr ) , the largest national latino civil rights and advocacy organization in the u.s. , i write on an issue of great importance to the hispanic community . 
on thursday , the house of representatives is scheduled to vote on legislation to reauthorize the head start program , the `` school readiness act of 2005 '' ( h.r. 2123 ) . 
this legislation is the result of bipartisan work of the committee on education and the workforce to address much-needed improvements to the program for latino children . 
for these reasons , nclr has pursued a reauthorization agenda focused on ensuring that head start continues to show progress in its effort to eliminate disparities in access and enhance the quality of services for latino and limited-english-proficient ( lep ) children and their families . 
we are pleased that members from both sides of the aisle supported this agenda and worked to include provisions in h.r. 2123 that significantly improve the program for latinos . 
these provisions include , but are not limited to , the following : additional resources for migrant and seasonal head start ( mshs ) program expansion , which will allow for thousands of farmworker children to exit the fields and enter the classroom . 
an accountability provision which ensures that head start providers serve new populations in their local communities through enhanced monitoring and evaluations of annual community assessments . 
a new requirement that the secretary conduct a study on the status of lep children and their families in head start and early head start programs . 
a new requirement that the secretary utilize training and technical assistance funds for activities aimed at assisting head start providers to conduct outreach and improve the quality of services to lep populations , particularly in states with new and rapidly growing lep populations . 
a new requirement that , in addition to making progress toward acquisition of the english language , leps show progress toward the school readiness indicators outlined in the head start education performance standards . 
we urge members of congress in closing , nclr affirms its strong support of provisions included in h.r. 2123 which increase access to and improve the quality of head start for latino children . 
dear representative : on behalf of the more than 750 , 000 members and supporters of people for the american way , we urge you to maintain the bipartisan direction of h.r. 2123 , the `` school readiness act of 2003 , '' and oppose any attempt to repeal longstanding anti-discrimination protections . 
head start programs not only offer opportunities to thousands of low-income children , they also enrich their communities by providing job opportunities to over a third of the parents whose children have participated in the program . 
as it stands , this bill currently upholds key anti-discrimination provisions that have been part of head start since its inception . 
this type of amendment would be a direct attack on bipartisan , anti-discrimination provisions that have been part of head start since its creation in 1981 and can not be tolerated . 
proponents of anti-civil rights provisions claim there is a need to exempt religious organizations from anti-discrimination laws in order to protect the religious identity of that organization . 
under this model , religious organizations have provided an invaluable contribution to the education of thousands of head start students and to the communities in which they live . 
again , we are pleased with the bipartisan direction of head start reauthorization legislation . 
the current , delicate balance encouraging the participation of religious organizations and compliance with our constitution should not be disrupted . 
& lt ; center & gt ; tanya m. clay , & lt ; /center & gt ; & lt ; center & gt ; deputy director of public policy . 
dear representatives : on behalf of the union for reform judaism , whose 900 congregations across north america encompass 1.5 million reform jews , and the central conference of american rabbis ( ccar ) , whose membership includes over 1800 reform rabbis , i strongly urge you to maintain the bipartisan character of the school readiness act of 2005 ( h.r. 2123 ) by opposing any attempt to repeal longstanding civil rights protections that prohibit faith-based head start centers from discriminating in whom they hire on the basis of religion . 
we expect government-funded programs to hire the people who are most qualified , not those whose religious beliefs best match those of an employer . 
one 's faith does not determine how one reads a book to preschoolers or sings the `` alphabet song. '' to deny children living in poverty the most qualified teacher is nothing short of an attack on head start 's core mission -- preparing children to succeed in school . 
since its founding , head start has prided itself on the strength of its family involvement component . 
head start has successfully trained many of its low-income parents to work at head start centers , helping parents rise out of poverty . 
in fact , the family and child experiences survey , prepared in january 2002 for the u.s. department of health and human services , found that over 40 percent of head start staff members had children in their households who were current or former head start participants . 
on the day this bill becomes law , faith-based head start programs could fire such staff members because of their religious beliefs . 
a head start center could refuse to consider a qualified parent for a job because of the way the parent chooses to worship . 
to plainly state such intentions diminishes the much-heralded bipartisan spirit of the bill and undermines the gains made thus far in the mark-up process . 
our tradition includes a story of a teacher whose prayer for rain was answered promptly . 
asked to tell of his special merit , he replied : `` i teach children of the poor as well as of the rich ; i accept no fee from any who can not afford it ; and i have a fishpond to delight the children and to encourage them to do their lessons. '' since 1965 , through its comprehensive services and high quality standards , head start has striven to give millions of children an equal opportunity to succeed in school , nurturing their love of learning and delight in life . 
the bill approved 48-0 by the house committee on education and the workforce that reaches the house floor is the product of many months of hard work resulting in a strong bipartisan agreement . 
any attempts to amend the bill and repeal these protections threaten not only the bipartisan spirit of the bill , but the integrity of the head start program itself . 
we represent a diverse array of religions , covering the political and ideological spectrum . 
the bipartisan bill that passed unanimously out of the committee on education and the workforce has the potential to garner support from a broad range of groups , including all of the religious groups on this letter , but not if the proposed language is included . 
as religious institutions , we support preserving the autonomy of religious organizations with respect to hiring decisions made in privately funded programs . 
however , we also recognize the importance of ensuring that taxpayer dollars do not fund positions connected with the operation of the program itself where candidates may be disqualified because of the religion they practice . 
the head start program is an extremely successful government funded means of achieving this goal , providing opportunities for nearly one million at-risk children each year . 
thank you for your consideration of this important matter . 
dear representative : omb watch strongly urges you to oppose the any attempt to include `` charitable choice '' provisions in the head start program , which would allow religious organizations to discriminate on the basis of the religion when hiring for federally funded programs . 
religious organizations play a meaningful role in the delivery of social service programs . 
we do not question the right of religious organizations to participate in federal programs , nor their ability to avail themselves of an exemption under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 that allows religious organizations to hire co-religionists with their own money . 
although religious employers have the right under title vii to apply religious tests to employees , the constitution requires that the direct receipt and administration of federal funds remove that exemption . 
the court stated that although the constitution does not bar religious organizations from participating in federal programs , it requires ( 1 ) that no one participating in a federal program can `` discriminate on the basis of religion '' and ( 2 ) that all federal programs must be carried out in a `` lawful , secular manner. '' id . 
the acceptance of federal funds -- taxpayer money -- should require all recipients to practice non-discrimination in hiring as it relates to those funds . 
i urge you to maintain the integrity of religious grantees and prevent government-funded religious discrimination by opposing any attempt to include `` charitable choice '' provisions into the head start program . 
all of the cases are consistent . 
it goes to the heart and soul of the head start program , and that is whether parents have voting rights or whether they are just going to get a pat on the head and told we like their opinions . 
a number of members have told me that if the amendment is not agreed to , they would vote against the bill . 
i urge them to move the bill forward regardless of what happens to the parents amendment . 
this happened originally in chicago and it is something that we are looking at doing in new orleans in the name of empowerment . 
we saw , when the republicans came to power in the 1980s and to the presidency , president reagan put jack kemp in charge of hud , housing and urban development , and we had tenant management and resident management moving to homeownership and we said , let the people make the decisions themselves . 
head start , when it came in the 1970s as part of richard nixon 's efforts to block grant , to give more local empowerment to react to the programs of the 1960s , the heart and soul of this program was to say , we are going to let the parents , in these preschool situations , in these low-income situations , we are going to let them make the decisions . 
this bill , unfortunately , because of a broader concern about how to address some of the problems in head start , removes the voting rights , the actual powers of those parents . 
not because of any gao report . 
it says the tips of financial mismanagement came from the parents . 
it is not because of the boards because , in the gao report , the boards are only mentioned twice , because they had financial problems . 
the underlying part of the bill addresses the financial difficulties that we have , and we have added in our amendment to make sure that fraud is actually addressed because there the board has legal liability if there is fraud , but not what is being served for lunch or what textbook or even who is hired and fired . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
the only reference in the hearings , i believe , was actually on the senate side from the deputy mayor of memphis who complained that he did not have decision-making powers to make some changes that he wanted to make , but it was not financial abuse or financial waste . 
in this case , it is not a question of whether the parents have veto power . 
the board tends to be leading citizens of the community who come in and review that . 
mr. chairman , i yield 1 minute to the gentleman from florida ( mr. keller ) xz4002120 , a member of the committee on education and the workforce and a leader on education issues . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of the time . 
this strips the parents of their power and lets them give their opinions . 
this is a tremendous reversal for either side of the aisle to make of the number one parent advisory program in america . 
and i am a parent of 3 children . 
two of which have been enrolled and ongoing participants in cani 's headstart program , my third child is going into her 2nd grade year with adams elementary , fort wayne community schools . 
i am currently the policy council president , and the vice-president of milc ( males involved leading children ) , and my wife and i are repeatedly volunteering for cani ( in-kind ) . 
i have received the volunteer of the year award from cani , and i have also received a certificate of recognition from the city of fort wayne , for my ongoing commitments with cani . 
which brings me to my disappointment with the news that some of these programs , most importantly the parent involvement initiative may be withdrawn from cani 's headstart programs . 
i would like for you and those involved with this decision to understand the importance of parent involvement . 
it has not only allowed for me to be more involved in the decisions that affect my children , it has also allowed me to be involved in some of the decisions that affect my community . 
i also have learned how important i am to the community and the development of my children , and my peers children . 
on behalf of parents of cani headstart . 
dear congressman souder : i am writing to urge you to support the restoration of full authority to parent policy councils in head start reauthorization legislation . 
the personal growth of parents involved in the head start program is a natural consequence of their participation in head start governance . 
one of the most rewarding benefits of my participation on the policy council has been to watch the growth and development of the male involvement committee . 
thank you for your consideration of these issues . 
i hope that my views will be addressed in your vote for the reauthorization of head start . 
the head start program is a vital part of the education process . 
the program offers opportunities early in the lives of children to build skills that will be needed in school and in life . 
i have served as a site chairperson , a member of the policy committee and currently serve as a community representative . 
it is because of the parent involvement component of the head start program that parent involvement became so important in my life . 
it is because of these beginnings that i continue to advocate for children on all levels . 
for many families , access to head start is the only way for their children to have any type of educational experience prior to elementary school . 
many of these children continue on to kindergarten because they have a head start in education and their parents realize how important early intervention is . 
as president of the indiana pta , i know how important the head start program is to children and families . 
if we do n't take care of our chi1dren today ... .. 
our children wo n't take care of us tomorrow . 
some of the issues that indiana pta will be focusing on are : early intervention , literacy ; parent involvement , advocacy and drug use . 
mr. chairman , i rise today in opposition of h.r. 2123 , the school readiness act of 2005 . 
instead , the republican majority has added an amendment which would , for the first time in head start 's 30-year history , allow a faith-based sponsored head start program to use federal taxpayer dollars to discriminate against highly qualified teachers and other employees solely because of their religious views . 
this head start bill , however , is only the latest example of such prejudice ; president bush and his congressional republican counterparts have steadily pushed an agenda latent with religious discrimination . 
it is time we had a head start reauthorization bill that focuses on improving the educational development of our children , and is not being used as a vehicle to teach our children one of the world 's ugliest lessons : discrimination . 
including children with disabilities in head start programs can be a rewarding experience for all involved : children , parents , and of course head start employees . 
but the linchpin for success with inclusion is proper training of employees to care for the children 's unique needs . 
include families who have one or more children with disabilities in the list of training course subjects the secretary is directed to provide for head start training employees so they can cope with that . 
i know firsthand , personally , both the victories and pitfalls of families who have dealt with children with learning disabilities . 
i know the worry and concern parents feel when they entrust the most precious being in their lives to the care of a stranger . 
head start personnel need to be trained , my colleagues , to mitigate these many concerns , and of course to provide meaningful guidance when a family faces a new challenge . 
proper training of head start employees will enable them to anticipate possible challenges , evaluate the current difficulties that they may or may not have , and will educate the employees in current strategies and resources which are available to parents . 
for parents ' piece of mind , it is imperative that those individuals caring for their children are simply equipped to handle any situation that may arise in that classroom . 
now , for head start teachers , training will equip them with the necessary tools , of course , to be successful . 
many human resources studies show the most common cause for dissatisfaction with a job is when employees feel ill equipped to meet the goals that are expected of them . 
they will have greater understanding of the underlying issues causing difficulty for that child and will be armed with a strategy to help them so they can ultimately succeed . 
training can make that experience teaching children with disabilities a positive one instead of a negative one . 
many of the expectations are new . 
they feel out of control themselves and they feel sort of helpless . 
by attending head start programs staffed with trained professionals , children will experience less stress , be more comfortable with their peers , accustom themselves with the behavioral expectations of classrooms , and learn strategies to deal with the inevitable distractions that are in a school setting . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of this bill . 
what we have to remember is this is about the children , children whose families are trapped in poverty trying to get a head start on education , which is the surest way out of poverty . 
it is disappointing to me there are some in here , because we provide some level of flexibility , and perhaps in some community it is a faith-based operation that can deliver the services best to a poor child in need of these services , that there are some willing to kill head start because of that level of flexibility . 
in my hometown , thankfully , it is the public school systems that have taken over the head start program because we suffered through the difficulties of financial problems . 
in fact , they have even got a very progressive system for head start children based on educare , an outstanding private preschool program that involves a holistic approach of the entire family . 
i want to end by thanking the gentleman from ohio ( mr. boehner ) xz4000360 because he also recognizes there was a glitch , a glitch that eliminated some of the lower-level rank-and-file service men and women from having their children in head start programs because of privatization of military housing . 
a national review of 36 studies on the long-term impact of early childhood education programs found that low-income children who participated in such programs were less likely to be held back , less likely to be placed in special education classes , more likely to succeed in school , more likely to graduate , and more likely to be rated as behaving well in class and better adjusted in school . 
researchers have also concluded that there is a greater chance of these positive outcomes when young children are taught by teachers with bachelor 's degrees in early childhood education . 
one of the largest national studies in this early education field was conducted by the national institute for child health and human development . 
it showed that caregiver education and training were among the strongest predictors of quality in programs for preschoolers . 
that is why it is a good thing that this bill has in it a provision that half of the head start teachers have to hold bachelor 's degrees within a few years . 
we talked in committee about the fact that it is necessary for us to try to help that population of teachers be able to afford that . 
in massachusetts , my state , they make less than half the salaries of kindergarten teachers . 
i am afraid some of the recommendations that are being put forward in the amendments here today are spectacular efforts to drive a wedge between the parties on this , to make it a less-than-unanimous bill . 
we can do better than that and pass a bill that is worthy of this congress and helpful to the united states people . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of this bill , though i have concerns about one specific provision that would go too far to allow discrimination . 
the basic tenet of head start is as true today as it was a generation ago -- quality early education programs can be instrumental in helping children overcome barriers to learning . 
there are few federal programs that can boost that kind of success . 
head start is one of the most important programs in our government and i am pleased to see this bill come to the floor with bipartisan support . 
any savings from funds designated for administrative costs should go towards serving the needs of these low-income students . 
this amendment provides the wrong type of incentive for head start grantees . 
so mr. chairman , i am voting in favor of this bill . 
mr. chairman , i strongly supported this bill as it came out of the committee . 
i was proud of the product the committee passed out . 
i was pleased to join with many of my colleagues on the other side in offering amendments that were supported on a bipartisan basis that i think strengthen the head start program . 
it takes us down a very dangerous road of taxpayer-financed religious bigotry . 
of course they do . 
just imagine if you are a highly qualified early education teacher , who is applying for a head start program that is expanding to take care of children who are victims of hurricane katrina . 
in all of the hearings that we have held in our committee on this issue , no faith-based organization has ever come up and said , gee , we could do a better job of teaching children if only we were allowed to discriminate in hiring teachers . 
i must say , one of the puzzling things , they concede that you can not proselytize , yet they say you can discriminate . 
mr. chairman , in solidarity with the national head start association , the children 's defense fund and countless other lifelong advocates of the head start program , it is with a heavy heart that i must oppose this final , amended version of the head start reauthorization on the floor today . 
moreover , a second amendment i proposed to offset the significant costs faced by head start grantees working to comply with the department of health and human services ' transportation safety requirements so that program dollars were n't diverted from serving kids was similarly not included . 
but , unlike failed initiatives in the recent past , the committee reported bill did not walk down the misguided path of block granting the head start program . 
with the inclusion of the boustany amendment , this bill for the first time seeks to legitimize publicly funded religious discrimination in the head start program . 
it takes money from taxpayers and then turns around and tells those same taxpayers they can be excluded from federally funded jobs in a head start center solely on the basis of their religious beliefs . 
mr. speaker , one of the things i have been terribly worried about is the inability of congress to move quickly to do something about the victims of katrina . 
we have an opportunity to use substantial resources that could be applied toward the rebuilding of homes , to getting people started again ; and if we keep fumbling and if we keep fiddling , then we are going to come under great criticism because we are not doing what we can do . 
so i would just simply urge all of my colleagues , do not play with this . 
mr. chairman , today i am a member of congress . 
i started as assistant teacher , and i went on to be the supervisor of parent involvement and volunteer services . 
i love head start , and i have a great appreciation for what my government has done in creating this program to give poor kids and the kids of working families an opportunity to get a head start , to get prepared for kindergarten and to get prepared for success . 
i think the committee did a good job in working through some of the problems . 
on sunday morning in america , religion is the most segregated sector of our society . 
we do not want to give that kind of example to our children . 
do not start the resegregation of america , it is wrong . 
the committee on education and the workforce voted for this head start bill unanimously , 48 to 0. but many of our republican colleagues today would destroy this bill , making it partisan by allowing religious discrimination in hiring while using federal funds , using taxpayer dollars . 
even though we are serving fewer than half of eligible children , the first 4 years of the george w. bush administration included four of the five smallest head start funding increases since 1991 . 
and the number of children served by head start has increased by less than one-tenth of 1 percent since the end of the clinton administration . 
opponents of my amendment will say that they would like to increase funding for head start , but that they just can not because budget constraints make it impossible . 
mr. chairman , this debate reminds me of the old saying , i have got good news and i have got bad news . 
the good news is that our committee worked in a bipartisan way to report out a bill by a vote of 48 to zero . 
and i want to thank our ranking member , the gentleman from california ( mr. george miller ) xz4002780 ; our chairman , the gentleman from ohio ( mr. boehner ) xz4000360 ; and the subcommittee chair , the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 , for making that possible , as well as all the members of the committee . 
first and foremost , the bill protects the high quality of head start programs by protecting local control of those programs . 
the bill also increases funding to migrant and seasonal and indian head start programs , strengthens teacher qualification requirements , and limits uses of the administration 's ill-conceived national testing system . 
first , even though fewer than half of eligible children receive head start services , and even though the number of children served has been going down under the bush administration , this bill does nothing to increase the number of children who will receive these critical services . 
they also can only hire members of their faith when they use their own funds . 
well , actually , religious organizations have never asked any of us to waive their discriminatory rights and privileges that they are asking for over on the other side of the aisle . 
head start kids are enough at risk as it is , without their teachers being chosen because of their religion , rather than because they are actually the best qualified . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from michigan ( mr. kildee ) xz4002160 , a member of the committee on education and the workforce . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself such time as i may consume to respond to the chairman of the committee . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from new jersey ( mr. menendez ) xz4002720 , the chair of the democratic caucus . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. kind ) xz4002180 , a member of our subcommittee . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from ohio ( mr. kucinich ) xz4002270 , a member of the subcommittee on education reform . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from maryland ( mr. van hollen ) xz4004150 , a member of the committee . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from new jersey ( mr. holt ) xz4001840 , a member of the committee on education and the workforce . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from california ( mrs. davis ) xz4000971 , who is a member of the education reform subcommittee . 
mr. chairman , i yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from virginia ( mr. scott ) xz4003641 , a member of the subcommittee . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
anything that accomplishes both of these goals is worth doing . 
approximately two-thirds of head start children are african american or hispanic , but not nearly so many of their teachers are . 
the more diverse our teachers are , the better they will be able to understand the experiences of children in our evermore diverse society , and the better they will be able to help those children learn . 
but , this administration rushed to test hundreds of thousands of children , and in so doing , used tests that are invalid and unreliable . 
this amendment will improve outreach and coordination of services for these very children , and this will help ensure that they receive the services they need to succeed in school and in life . 
mr. chairman , i thank the chairman of the subcommittee , the chairman of the full committee , and the gentlewoman from california ( ms. woolsey ) xz4004360 for their support . 
i ask all of my colleagues to support this very worthy amendment . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
the underlying bill requires that head start grantees keep their administrative expenses to 15 percent or less of the grant . 
that is , unless this amendment passes and the grantee is a for-profit organization , in which case under my colleague 's amendment , the difference between the 15 percent and lower expenses simply would be in the pocket of the for-profit organization . 
so my colleague 's amendment comes down to this , very simply : whether we want the benefits of more efficient administration of grantees to go to the children or whether we want to give the businesses an incentive to cut corners for profits . 
mr. chairman , i yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from california ( mr. george miller ) xz4002780 , our ranking member . 
mr. chairman , i am offering this amendment on behalf of the gentleman from mississippi ( mr. thompson ) xz4004032 who is unable to be here this afternoon . 
mr. chairman , this amendment will help some of the most vulnerable victims of hurricane katrina , the children . 
as a result of hurricane katrina , many families have been displaced from their homes and their schools . 
this amendment allows displaced families to enroll their children under the age of 5 in head start . 
in mississippi , 44 head start centers were impacted by hurricane katrina , 18 centers will be closed indefinitely , and 26 more are in need of repair . 
approximately 26 , 743 children within the state of the gentleman from mississippi ( mr. thompson ) xz4004032 are eligible for head start services prior to hurricane katrina . 
in the neighboring state of louisiana , 117 centers were impacted , 83 remain closed , and 34 centers are providing partial services . 
in alabama , 9 centers were impacted , 3 centers will be closed indefinitely , and 6 are in need of repair . 
this amendment provides a waiver for 6 months for those families that do not have proof of immunizations and income levels to participate in the head start program . 
this 6-month waiver authority also permits the secretary of health and human services to waive the 20 percent local head start match requirement . 
the total number of head start children affected by hurricane katrina is approximately 18 , 000 . 
since the devastation of hurricane katrina , more families are now head start eligible . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
it is sad because we are debating whether to amend a program that came out of our country 's struggle for civil rights by restricting those very civil rights . 
under current law , religious organizations can hire members of their own faith using only their own funds , and they have always been able to do that . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
i want to read two paragraphs from a letter from barbara pickney , who is head of the st . 
landry parish head start program and is state president of the louisiana head start association . 
paragraph number 1 : `` i have become aware that an amendment has been offered by representative boustany , a republican from louisiana , to the head start bill on the house floor today that would give faith-based organizations providing head start services the right to discriminate with federal funds against employees who are of different faiths . 
as the state president of the louisiana head start association , i strongly oppose such an amendment. '' then she goes on to say , `` i am greatly concerned that the provision to remove civil rights protections for employees could have a negative impact on the children and families who participate in these programs . 
tens of thousands of at-risk 3- and 4-year-old children currently in head start could lose their teachers , who often are the most important adults to whom they have bonded , other than their parents ; not because those teachers are doing a bad job , but because they are the wrong religion. '' that was barbara pickney , st . 
landry parish head start program , state president of the louisiana head start association . 
mr. chairman , i yield myself the balance of my time . 
it will strip civil rights protections by allowing religious organizations to discriminate in hiring on the basis of religion for head start positions , and i repeat , using federal taxpayers ' money . 
under the amendment , a religious organization could tell a potential head start teacher , of all of the applicants we have seen , you would be the best one to teach our kids , but we are not going to hire you , because you are not the right religion . 
as i said earlier , head start kids are at risk as it is , without their teachers being chosen because of their religion instead of whether they are the best qualified . 
mr. chairman , i ask the members of this body , think before you vote yes on this . 
we know that children who begin kindergarten and first grade prepared both socially and mentally to learn have a much greater opportunity of success , not just in school but in life . 
improving the quality of head start should be a priority for all of us . 
one of the greatest challenges of any federal program is to ensure that hard-earned taxpayer money is used only for the purpose intended , and the current head start program does not live up to that principle . 
there is disturbing evidence that a sizable share of head start funding never reaches its target : disadvantaged children . 
the director of a head start program in gardenville , maryland , was indicted on charges that she stole more than $ 350 , 000 from the organization over a 4-year period . 
a former director of a head start program in charleston , west virginia , was sentenced up to 5 months in federal prison after admitting he used an agency credit card for a personal trip to the kentucky derby and preparing a false invoice for computer repairs . 
the executive director of the kansas city , missouri , head start operation earned a salary in excess of $ 300 , 000 annually and drove a luxury suv , leased in part with federal head start funds . 
the department of justice gained a guilty plea from an executive director of a lubbock , texas , head start program after he embezzled more than $ 800 , 000 over 2 years and diverted part of the money to a local restaurant . 
mr. chairman , it is a priority of this republican congress to ensure that the necessary financial controls are in place to safeguard against these abuses and to protect the public 's confidence in this important school readiness program . 
safeguards against financial abuse in this bill include an independent financial audit annually , an annual report detailing how their money is spent and the sources of their funding , oversight by a local governance board , and a requirement that administrative costs may not exceed more than 15 percent of the total program cost . 
i commend the chairman for his leadership and the leadership of the subcommittee chairman , the gentleman from delaware ( mr. castle ) xz4000700 , for this bill ; and i urge all members of the house to support h.r. 2123 . 
mr. speaker , i rise in opposition to the rule and in strong opposition to the boustany amendment and to add my name to the chorus of religious individuals and organizations that oppose this ill-conceived and harmful amendment . 
as an ordained minister of the united methodist church , i recognize the important role faith-based organizations play in providing educational , health , and social support services to low-income children and their parents . 
by the faith community , we have been able to provide all kinds of services . 
in fact , my first job after college was working in catholic charities , which received tens of millions of federal dollars to run programs . 
in my religious tradition , we give great recognition to the apostle paul , who said : `` there is neither greek nor jew , circumcision nor uncircumcision , barbarian , scythian , bond nor free , '' and it goes on to say : `` put on , therefore , as the elect of god , holy and beloved , tender mercies , kindness , humbleness of mind , meekness , long suffering. '' that is not in this amendment . 
proponents of this amendment claim it is necessary to protect religious freedom . 
how is it religious freedom when we frustrate the laws of the land ? 
tens of thousands of children currently in head start could lose their teachers to whom they have bonded . 
and their parents could be denied the chance to climb out of poverty by moving from head start , discriminating against current and potential teachers because of religion , causing children to lose one of the most important adults in their lives , denying parents the chance to elevate themselves out of poverty . 
churches have been seen historically as a citadel for justice , a place of peace , a place of racial harmony . 
we must maintain the integrity of religious entities . 
the constitution of the united states explicitly states that congress shall make no law prohibiting the free exercise of religion . 
not allowing our churches , mosques , and synagogues to hire people of like mind and similar beliefs is not only an affront to their very core but contrary to this great nation 's constitution . 
denying religious organizations the ability to hire an employee because of his or her beliefs is to take away that employee 's right to think , speak , and believe as he or she so chooses . 
are we going to deny many of the poorest and less fortunate children the opportunity to learn in these early childhood education programs simply because it is a church that is administering it ? 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of the boustany amendment which seeks to include important protections for religious organizations in this bill . 
as i stated in my remarks during consideration of the rule , this nation is second to none in charitable giving and in helping others in need . 
this is not just a religious tenet , but an american principle , and we as americans must continue to encourage and foster that spirit of giving and serving others . 
not allowing those organizations , who have proven they are some of the best at feeding the hungry , healing the sick , and housing the homeless , to provide early childhood education for our children is just wrong . 
i rise in support of the boustany amendment . 
there has been a lot of talk about how it would appear these faith-based organizations are bigoted and maybe even arrogant for wanting to express their views . 
it could be , if the government wants to take advantage of the location , let us say , of a hebrew school in downtown new york , that it is the best possible route of caring for people in need in that area . 
it is the ultimate of arrogance on the part of the federal government . 
in a 1987 case , corporation of the presiding bishop v. amos , the court supported this kind of approach . 
this year we are breaking new ground by mandating at least 5 percent of the head start budget to go to migrant and seasonal programs . 
i want to thank the chairman and the members of the committee for this . 
this is a case where a small increase in funding can make a big difference to a lot of children , changing the path they are on . 
i know that for the migrant farm worker population facing a unique set of challenges , working on a seasonal basis , migrant families often have to move from state to state during the year , making it extremely difficult for the children to get in and remain in high-quality educational programs . 
this program is important , and i know because i am also the son of migrant workers . 
mr. speaker , i rise today in support of a program that works , head start , and our efforts today to reauthorize the program in this school readiness act . 
head start has proven itself time and time again to be an effective program and a worthwhile investment of federal dollars . 
an investment of $ 100 , 000 means that ultimately you would see $ 700 , 000 in your account . 
in fact , with those returns , we should be authorizing a higher level of funding . 
we are all aware of just how critical a child 's first years are , and this is a program that is so much more than just early education and reading skills . 
earlier this year , i visited two of the over 110 head start centers in sacramento county in my district . 
during the visit , i witnessed the tangible reward of this program , as well as the harder-to-define benefits . 
at one of the centers , they were learning about shoes , from slippers and sneakers to work boots and rain boots . 
the children were not only learning about how the shoes indicated what people were doing , but about all of the possibilities available to them ; that one day they , too , could be wearing those doctor 's booties or those firefighter 's boots . 
with a goal in mind , maybe not consciously outlined but still a hint of an idea , these children began to dream about the positive benefits of education and where in life an education can take them . 
lifting children out of poverty , offering them hope and possibility instead of despair is truly a worthwhile endeavor , a lesson that head start works to teach . 
the idea of discrimination is not something we should be teaching our children . 
by allowing this discrimination , we could be blocking countless parents from rising out of poverty . 
already , thousands of parents have transitioned from parent volunteer to a full-time paid head start teacher . 
head start emerged from the civil rights platform of equality and minimizing the reach of poverty in this nation . 
we should keep it that way , for all the children of sacramento and all across the country . 
i would hope that during consideration of this legislation today , we would vote down the religious discrimination amendment so we can see this good bill move forward . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of h.r. 420 , the lawsuit abuse and reduction act , lara , and i oppose the substitute amendment . 
this bill , the underlying bill , continues the commitment of the house republicans to grow our economy , help small businesses , and put a stop to abusive lawsuits . 
this bill does that and will help millions of small businesses combat some of the worst abuses by frivolous lawsuits . 
in particular , lara would make mandatory the sanctions and monetary penalties under federal rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure for filing frivolous lawsuits and abusing the litigation process . 
it would also permit monetary sanctions including reimbursement of reasonable attorneys ' fees and litigation costs in connection with frivolous lawsuits . 
this legislation protects the integrity of the judicial system by penalizing the bad actors in litigation , both plaintiffs and defendants , i might say . 
the number of civil lawsuits has tripled since the 1960s and has gripped the american citizens and small businesses with a fear of costly and unwarranted lawsuits . 
the threat of abusive litigation forces businesses to settle frivolous claims , rather than to go through the expensive and time-consuming process of defending lawsuits from the discovery process all the way to trial . 
i would like to thank the gentleman from texas , the chairman of the subcommittee on courts , the internet , and intellectual property , for having prepared this legislation and moved it forward as he has . 
mr. chairman , i want to first of all commend the gentleman from texas for his leadership in this area . 
this is a very important piece of legislation . 
i am pleased to be a cosponsor of h.r. 420 , legislation that will help curtail frivolous lawsuits . 
it is reassuring to once again see that the congress is taking measures to help rid our court system of lawsuits that are costly and hurt both consumers and businesses in our country . 
the actual standard of what constitutes a frivolous lawsuit will not change . 
justice david brewer once wrote : `` america is the paradise of lawyers. '' in my opinion , this `` paradise '' has resulted in increased prices for consumer goods and higher insurance premiums and a decrease in domestic manufacturing , which has been one of the things that we have heard more and more discussion about in this country , the loss of manufacturing jobs . 
h.r. 420 seeks to rein in lawsuit-happy litigators by restoring mandatory sanctions for filing frivolous lawsuits , a violation of rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure . 
this bill also prevents forum shopping by requiring that personal injury cases be brought only where the plaintiff resides , where the plaintiff was allegedly injured , or where the defendant 's principal place of business is located . 
as a member of the house judiciary committee , as well as a member of the small business committee , i have heard endless accounts of family-owned small businesses being led to financial ruin by the exorbitant cost of frivolous lawsuits . 
according to the nfib , the national federation of independent businesses , small business owners ranked the cost and availability of liability insurance as the second most important problem facing small business owners today . 
either choice significantly impacts the operations of a business and the livelihood of its employees . 
this hurts the little guy because of these lawsuits . 
it will allow business owners to focus on hiring new employees , which is really critical in this economy that we are faced with , and expanding the availability of products and services and improving the american economy . 
mr. chairman , i again want to thank the gentleman from texas for his leadership in introducing this important piece of legislation . 
it is time that we put an end to these frivolous lawsuits that are impacting the economy , that are hurting , especially , small businesses and are resulting in the loss of jobs of many , many americans in this country . 
madam speaker , by direction of the committee on rules , i call up h. res. 508 and ask for its immediate consideration . 
madam speaker , for the purpose of debate only , i yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from massachusetts ( mr. mcgovern ) xz4002630 , pending which i yield myself such time as i may consume . 
during consideration of this resolution , all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only . 
it provides for 1 hour of general debate , equally divided and controlled by the chairman and the ranking minority member of the committee on the judiciary . 
it waives all points of order against consideration of the bill , and it provides that the amendment in the nature of a substitute recommended by the committee on the judiciary now printed in the bill shall be considered as an original bill for the purpose of amendment and shall be considered as read . 
it provides that the amendments printed in the report may be offered only in the order printed , may be offered only by the member designated in the report , shall be considered as read , shall be debatable for the time specified in the report , equally divided and controlled by the proponent and an opponent , shall not be subject to amendment , and shall not be subject to a demand for division of the question in the house or in the committee of the whole . 
this resolution waives all points of order against the amendments printed in the report , and it provides one motion to recommit , with or without instructions . 
madam speaker , i rise today in support of house resolution 508 and the underlying legislation , h.r. 420 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 . 
first , i want to commend the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. sensenbrenner ) xz4003650 , the distinguished chairman of the committee on the judiciary , not just for the underlying bill but for a number of recent bills aimed at strengthening our legal system by protecting people 's rights under the law and shielding them from frivolous proceedings . 
additionally , i want to thank the gentleman from texas ( mr. smith ) xz4003802 , the chairman of the subcommittee on the courts , the internet , and intellectual property , for sponsoring h.r. 420 . 
madam speaker , over the past couple of weeks , this house has taken several important steps to reform our legal system , to relieve our overburdened court dockets and drastically reduce the number of costly frivolous claims against innocent and legitimate businesses . 
on october 24 , we passed and sent to the president 's desk s. 397 , the lawful commerce in arms act of 2005 , by a vote of 283 to 144 in the house . 
i might add that in the spirit of bipartisanship , 59 democrats and one independent joined 223 republicans in passing this landmark legislation that refocuses liability for gun violence on the actual criminal , the person who pulled the trigger . 
additionally in this house , 226 republicans , along with 80 democrats , passed h.r. 554 , the personal responsibility in food consumption act of 2005 . 
this bill also reaffirms the need for individuals to take responsibility for their own actions and not expect someone else to foot the bill for the adverse health consequences of their own gluttony . 
the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 will go a long way to curb the actions of individuals who would seek to abuse our courts by gaming the judicial system . 
last week , there were probably millions of people across this country who tuned in , ticket in hand , to see if they had won a $ 340 million powerball jackpot . 
however , madam speaker , it is the american people and small businesses that pay the ultimate price for frivolous lawsuits and this type of jackpot justice . 
they pay for it through higher prices for goods and services , they pay for it through diminished quality of products , they pay for it through loss of economic freedom , and they pay for it through a clogged court system that has been turned into an atm for junk lawsuits . 
clearly , the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 is a bill that is sorely overdue , sorely needed and , i might add , was approved by this house in the last congress by a vote of 229 to 174 . 
with respect to the underlying bill , it would amend rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure by restoring the mandatory sanctions for the filing of frivolous lawsuits . 
simply put , it just makes sense to stop and punish the willful abuse of our legal system by the slash-and-burn tactics of frivolous lawsuits . 
as always , i look forward to the consideration of this rule , and i ask my colleagues to support it and the underlying bill . 
madam speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
madam speaker , in response to some of the comments that were made , i just want to hold up this document that lists over 300 groups in support of lara , the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 , and i will include them in the record . 
i would like to also point out that the federal judicial center was in opposition to class action reform , which we passed in the previous congress and in the 108th by a vote in this body of 279 to 149 . 
groups supporting h.r. 420 -- the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 advanced medical technology association . 
air conditioning contractors of america . 
alliance of automotive service providers of minnesota . 
alliance of automotive service providers of pennsylvania . 
america chamber of commerce ( nv ) . 
american council of engineering companies . 
antelope valley chamber of commerce ( ca ) . 
ardmore chamber of commerce ( ok ) . 
associated general contractors of america . 
association of equipment manufacturers . 
association of pool & amp ; spa professionals . 
automotive parts & amp ; service association of illinois . 
brunswick-golden isles chamber of commerce ( ga ) . 
business council of new york state , inc . 
chamber of business and industry of centre county ( pa ) . 
chamber of commerce for anderson & amp ; madison county ( in ) . 
chamber of commerce of the mid-ohio valley ( wv ) . 
citizens against lawsuit abuse of central texas . 
city of chicago , national electrical contractors association . 
civil justice association of california . 
council of insurance agents and brokers . 
crawfordsville/montgomery chamber of commerce ( in ) . 
dayton area chamber of commerce ( oh ) . 
florida chamber of commerce . 
georgia association of petroleum retailers , inc . 
hobbs chamber of commerce ( nm ) . 
hospitality association of south carolina . 
humble area chamber of commerce ( tx ) . 
independent insurance agents & amp ; brokers of america , inc . 
international association of plastics distributors . 
kansas chamber of commerce . 
kingman area chamber of commerce ( az ) . 
lakewood chamber of commerce ( wa ) . 
latrobe area chamber of commerce ( pa ) . 
lebanon valley chamber of commerce ( pa ) . 
manufacturers ' association of northwest pennsylvania . 
marion area chamber of commerce ( il ) . 
mechanical contractors association of america . 
mason contractors association of america . 
michigan chamber of commerce . 
montana chamber of commerce/montana liability coalition . 
national association of chemical distributors . 
national association of convenience stores . 
national association of electrical distributors . 
national association of home builders . 
national association of manufacturers . 
national association of mutual insurance companies . 
national association of sign supply distributors . 
national association of wholesaler-distributors . 
national council of chain restaurants of the national retail federation . 
national federation of independent business . 
nahad -- the association for hose & amp ; accessories distributors npes -- the association for suppliers of printing , publishing and converting technologies . 
northern rhode island chamber of commerce . 
ohio association of wholesaler-distributors . 
orange chamber of commerce ( ca ) . 
painting & amp ; decorating contractors of america . 
paris area chamber of commerce & amp ; tourism ( il ) . 
petroleum marketers association of america . 
printing & amp ; imaging association of mid-america ( ks , mo , ok , tx ) . 
printing association of florida . 
printing industries association of san diego . 
printing industries of michigan . 
printing industry association of the south ( al , ar , ky , la , ms , tn , wv ) . 
printing industries of america . 
printing industries of illinois/indiana association . 
printing industries of new england ( me , nh , vt , ma , ri ) . 
property casualty insurers association of america . 
restaurant and hospitality association of indiana . 
restaurant association of maryland , inc . 
restaurant association of metro washington , inc . 
ssda-at -- service station dealers of america/ national coalition petroleum retailers and allied trades . 
society of american florists . 
the state chamber of oklahoma . 
tarpon springs chamber of commerce ( fl ) . 
tennessee chamber of commerce & amp ; industry . 
texas association of business . 
u.s. chamber of commerce . 
west virginia chamber of commerce . 
western association of fastener distributors . 
weston area chamber of commerce ( fl ) . 
wood machinery manufacturers of america . 
madam speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
to the gentleman from massachusetts , we do not actually have any additional speakers at this time , so right now i am reserving the balance of my time for the purpose of closing , unless another speaker comes . 
madam speaker , i would first like to close this debate by thanking my colleagues for a very productive discussion of both the rule and h.r. 420 . 
the opportunity before this house today is another example of how this congress has improved our legal system and preventing frivolous lawsuits from closing the doors of justice for those who have truly been harmed . 
contrary to what the opponents of legal reform might say , the underlying bill , as well as other recent bills , do not demonstrate contempt for our legal system or the esteemed profession of attorneys , but rather demonstrate respect for the important and historic role of our judicial system in defending the rights and ensuring the constitutional application of the laws . 
frivolous lawsuits have not only driven up costs and destroyed economic opportunity for the american people , but they have also damaged the image of the courts . 
when the american people stop respecting the decisions of the judiciary , the courts begin to lose their effectiveness , and they cease to perform their constitutionally mandated role . 
for the sake of the courts and for the sake of the american people , we in this house need to push forward with this additional meaningful and genuine reform . 
therefore , i would like to urge all of my colleagues on both sides of the center aisle to support this rule and the underlying bill . 
madam speaker , i yield back the balance of my time , and i move the previous question on the resolution . 
i rise in opposition of h.r. 420 and in support of the substitute . 
rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure was amended in 1993 to its current state because it was being abused by defendants in civil rights cases who filed a series of rule 11 motions to harass the men and women who challenged discrimination . 
until now there has been no demonstrated problems with the current version of the rule . 
usually this type of change in civil procedure goes through a process of the rules enabling act . 
the lawsuit reduction act would amend rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure and revert back to that pre-1993 status . 
at the time some people thought brown v. board of education was a frivolous lawsuit , but it did not look like it had a chance until the supreme court recognized that separate was not equal . 
if we had this strict version of rule 11 back then , maybe brown v. board of education would have never made it to the supreme court . 
this bill is another example of congress intruding on states ' rights . 
our system of government is designed to keep our judicial system separate , particularly our state judicial system . 
while no one likes to see unnecessary , merit-less lawsuits clogging our court system , this bill only serves as an unneeded intrusion of federal authority into state matters . 
h.r. 420 substantially changes state court procedure by forcing state judges , within 30 days of a case being filed , to conduct an extensive and lengthy pre-trial hearing to determine whether federal sanctions must be imposed in a state proceeding . 
this would require a judge to examine evidence in detail and even to make a pre-trial judgment as to what the outcome of a case might be . 
mr. chairman , states already have some version of the rule that is exactly or substantially similar to the federally available sanction . 
as i mentioned during the committee on the judiciary 's oversight hearing on this legislation during its first iteration in the 108th congress and reiterated in my statement for the markup , one of the main functions of that body 's oversight is to analyze potentially negative impact against the benefits that a legal process or piece of legislation will have on those affected . 
the base bill before the house today does not represent the product of careful analysis and therefore , it is critical that members be given the ability to offer amendments to improve its provisions . 
in the case of h.r. 4571 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act the oversight functions of the judiciary committee allowed us to craft a bill that will protect those affected from negative impacts of the shield from liability that it proposes . 
this legislation requires an overhaul in order to make it less of a misnomer -- to reduce abuse rather than encourage it . 
the goal of the tort reform legislation is to allow businesses to externalize , or shift , some of the cost of the injuries they cause to others . 
this legislation would reverse the changes to rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure , frcp , that were made by the judicial conference in 1993 such that ( 1 ) sanctions against an attorney whose litigation tactics are determined to harass or cause unnecessary delay or cost or who has been determined to have made frivolous legal arguments or unwarranted factual assertions would become mandatory rather than discretionary to the court , ( 2 ) discovery-related activity would be included within the scope of the rule , and ( 3 ) the rule would be extended to state cases affecting interstate commerce so that if a state judge decides that a case affects interstate commerce , he or she must apply rule 11 if violations are found . 
this legislation strips state and federal judges of their discretion in the area of applying rule 11 sanctions . 
why is the discretion of the judge not sufficient in discerning whether rule 11 sanctions should be assessed ? 
because the application of rule 11 would be mandatory , attorneys will pad their legal fees to account for the additional risk that they will have to incur in filing lawsuits and the fact that they will have no opportunity to withdraw the suit due to a mistake . 
we must carefully consider the long-term implications that this bill , as drafted , will have on indigent claimants , the trial attorney community , and facilitation of corporate fraud . 
frankly , however , this legislation is not merely a denial of justice . 
it is an obliteration , a complete destruction of justice . 
it is interesting in the backdrop of the united states promoting democratization in iraq , challenging iran , and now with the proceedings against saddam hussein and the very basis of our dependence upon a fair and impartial judicial system that will allow lawyers to be able to petition for their client or defend their client , that we would stand here on the floor of the house today and in essence create the lawsuit elimination legislation rather than the suggestion that we are preventing abuse . 
that means that , in essence , it forces state judges within 30 days of a case being filed to conduct an extensive and lengthy pretrial hearing to determine whether federal rule 10 must be imposed . 
this now protects foreign corporations at the expense of consumers . 
because you may be able to sue in a state court , but the state court may not have jurisdiction over that foreign corporation , leaving the victim of products liability , the victim of a terrible heinous accident left without remedy in a state court . 
it says to our judges that although you have gone to the highest litmus test , confirmation on the federal bench , elections and bar scrutiny , we are telling you that we are going to pierce your courtroom and we are going to take away the rights of rule 11 where you have discretion and we are going to simply tell you to throw a lawyer out . 
the question of an equal education under brown v. topeka might have been frivolous . 
this bill allows judges to order individuals to reimburse litigation costs , including attorneys ' fees , by specifically stating that reasonable attorneys ' fees should be taken into account when assessing the amount of the sanction . 
that is frivolous lawsuits , when you had enterprise , a very big company , filed a lawsuit against rent-a-wreck of america , a tiny rental company , and hertz corporation and threatened to file lawsuits against several other rental car companies that used the phrase , `` pick you up , '' claiming that `` we 'll pick you up '' is enterprise 's slogan . 
then there was a whole bunch of other lawsuits around who will pick you up , and who is not picking you up and why you are being picked up . 
this legislation removes the safe harbor provision of the rule which allows an attorney a period of 21 days to withdraw an objectionable pleading . 
mr. chairman , i rise in opposition to the base bill before the committee of the whole h.r. 4571 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 and state my support for the substitute offered by the gentleman from as california , mr. schiff . 
as i mentioned during the committee on the judiciary 's oversight hearing on this legislation during its iteration in the 108th congress and reiterated in my statement for the markup , one of the main functions of the congress before it passes legislation is to analyze potentially negative impact against the benefits that it might have on those affected . 
the base bill before the house today does not represent the product of careful analysis . 
in the case of h.r. 4571 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act , the oversight functions of the judiciary committee allowed us to craft a bill that will protect those affected from negative impacts of the shield from liability that it proposes . 
this legislation required an overhaul in order to make it less of a misnomer -- to reduce abuse rather than encourage it . 
the goal of the tort reform legislation is to allow businesses to externalize , or shift , some of the cost of the injuries they cause to others . 
this legislation would reverse the changes to rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure , frcp , that were made by the judicial conference in 1993 such that ( 1 ) sanctions against an attorney whose litigation tactics are determined to harass or cause unnecessary delay or cost or who has been determined to have made frivolous legal arguments or unwarranted factual assertions would become mandatory rather than discretionary to the court , ( 2 ) discovery-related activity would be included within the scope of the rule , and ( 3 ) the rule would be extended to state cases affecting interstate commerce so that if a state judge decides that a case affects interstate commerce , he or she must apply rule 11 if violations are found . 
this legislation strips state and federal judges of their discretion in the area of applying rule 11 sanctions . 
why is the discretion of the judge not sufficient in discerning whether rule 11 sanctions should be assessed ? 
because the application of rule 11 would be mandatory , attorneys will pad their legal fees to account for the additional risk that they will have to incur in filing lawsuits and the fact that they will have no opportunity to withdraw the suit due to a mistake . 
the text of the amendment defined the term `` benedict arnold corporation '' and proposed to prevent such companies from benefiting from the legal remedies that h.r. 4571 purports to offer . 
the `` benedict arnold corporation '' refers to a company that , in bad faith , takes advantage loopholes in our tax code to establish bank accounts or to ship jobs abroad for the main purpose of tax avoidance . 
a tax-exempt group that monitors corporate influence called `` citizen works '' has compiled a list of 25 fortune 500 corporations that have the most offshore tax-haven subsidiaries . 
the percentage of increase in the number of tax havens held by these corporations since between 85.7 percent and 9 , 650 percent . 
this significant increase in the number of corporate tax havens is no coincidence when we look at the benefits that can be fund in doing sham business transactions . 
some of these corporations are `` benedict arnolds '' because they have given up their american citizenship ; however , they still conduct a substantial amount of their business in the united states and enjoy tax deductions of domestic corporations . 
such an amendment would preclude these corporations from enjoying the benefit of mandatory attorney sanctions for a rule 11 violation . 
in the context of the judiciary 's consideration of the terrorist penalties enhancement act , h.r. 2934 , my colleagues accepted an amendment that i offered that ensured that corporate felons were included in the list of individuals eligible for prosecution for committing terrorist offenses . 
we must carefully consider the long-term implications that this bill , as drafted , will have on indigent claimants , the trial attorney community , and facilitation of corporate fraud . 
a 2005 report issued by the u.s. department of justice says that the u.s. district courts in some areas , of course , fell 79 percent , fell 79 percent , the cases , the tort cases , between 1985 and 2003 . 
according to the administrative office of the u.s. courts , tort actions in the u.s. district courts went down from 29 percent from 2002 to 2003 , so it fell 28 percent . 
but the question is , it is not broken , and here we are putting heavier burdens on the court system that literally shuts the door closed to a number of individuals , and i think that is completely unacceptable for the responsibility of this congress . 
they said , judge , no matter what the facts are of the case , if this is the penalty , then you impose such penalty . 
what is very interesting is , even though my colleague cited john kerry , john edwards , president bush , and the judiciary committee , not one of them have sat as a judge in a case , making decisions about rule 11 cases . 
i am proud to say that i served as a judge for 10 years in the trial court in the state of ohio and have had the ability to review complaints , review discovery decisions , review pleadings . 
it is unconscionable that the claim that businesses get on with more business or they can hire more employees , to use that to play against the ability of a plaintiff to bring a lawsuit . 
what is going to make business do better in the united states of america is this country having a policy that encourages business . 
what is going to make people work better in the united states of america is having greater opportunity for business , and you can not blame business not doing well on lawsuits , just as you can not blame doctors running all over creation because of medical malpractice . 
i encourage all of my colleagues to take a close look at what this legislation will do , to take a close look and listen to the arguments that are being made by my colleagues with regard to this legislation , and vote in opposition to h.r. 420 . 
mr. chairman , i rise today as a cosponsor and strong supporter of the lawsuit abuse reduction act . 
i am going to tell the members why i support this legislation and what the key components of this legislation is . 
we need to get back to the old-fashioned principles of personal responsibility and get away from this new culture where people play the victim and blame others for their problems . 
most importantly , we need to protect those small business people who are out there creating 70 percent of all new jobs in america . 
they have to pay about 10 grand to settle the case to get rid of it for strictly business reasons even though they did nothing wrong . 
first , it provides tough mandatory sanctions , not discretionary sanctions , if a judge finds that we have a violation of rule 11 , which may include the payment of the other side 's attorneys ' fees . 
i happen to be the author of it . 
that is the policy of the white house . 
so we have the democrat presidential candidate , mr. kerry ; the democrat vice presidential candidate , mr. edwards ; the president of the united states ; and the judiciary committee on a voice vote adopted this three-strikes-and-you're-out provision . 
the third key element of this lawsuit abuse reduction act is language to avoid forum shopping . 
for example , if you lived in orlando , florida , like i do , and you went to your local mcdonald 's and you slipped on a puddle of water , you could bring your suit in orlando , where it should be . 
what you could not do is say , well , i know that madison county , illinois is a judicial hellhole , and there are lots of plaintiff-friendly judges , and mcdonald 's does business up in madison county , illinois . 
that is the kind of thing that is not going to be allowed here . 
mr. chairman , i think we can all concede or stipulate that no one is in favor of frivolous lawsuits in this country . 
as a former special prosecutor , state prosecutor in wisconsin , and as a young lawyer who used to handle corporate litigation in a large law firm , i saw firsthand some of the abuses that take place in the judicial process . 
but i believe that there is a right and a wrong way of moving forward in dealing with the frivolous lawsuit situation in the country . 
unfortunately , the majority base bill today , i think , is the wrong approach , whereas the substitute that we are offering here cures a lot of defects that the majority is offering and would put some substance behind cracking down on the filing of frivolous lawsuits . 
but first let us correct some of the facts . 
there has been a lot of rhetoric from some of our colleagues here claiming that the real bane of the judicial system today are a bunch of trial attorneys running around chasing ambulances , filing needless personal injury cases , clogging the court system , driving up litigation costs , increasing the expenses of corporations , and that is what is to be blamed in regards to dealing with frivolous lawsuits , when , in fact , the facts indicate just the opposite . 
a recent comprehensive study by public citizen has shown that the explosion in the filing of lawsuits has really rested with the corporations of this country , who have been filing four to five times more claims and lawsuits than individual plaintiffs in this country . 
furthermore , when rule 11 sanctions have been applied , they have been applied in 69 percent of the cases against corporations that are abusing the discovery process or filing needless lawsuits . 
so it is not these money-grubbing trial attorneys that so many want to believe that exist out there that are causing a lot of the problem in the judicial system ; it is rather corporations that are increasing it . 
it is those who are most eager to support the majority base bill who are most likely to take advantages of the opportunities of filing lawsuits in our country . 
but we are also today , and both of us , the majority and the substitute , is really usurping the rules enabling act . 
when congress passed that , it was a recognition that we here really do not have a lot of good expertise , and we are not in the trenches dealing with these rules every day . 
they submit it to the supreme court for approval , who then finally submits it to congress for our consideration to adopt or to revise at the end of the day . 
this has been tried between 1983 and 1993 , and the rules were changed because it was not working , because we were taking away too much discretion from the judges in the application of rule 11 . 
it had a disproportionate impact on the filing of civil rights actions in this country . 
our substitute bill cures that by exempting the filing of civil rights under this legislation . 
this is significant , because as the gentleman from california pointed out that when there were attempts to stifle meritorious claims from going forward or increasing the litigation costs in lawsuits , it was usually in the civil rights actions that were taken during this period which led to the change and the reform of mandatory sanctions back to a discretionary system , allowing the judges to decide the application of the appropriate penalties based on the facts and circumstances of the case . 
i would commend a recently released movie called `` north country '' to all of my colleagues before they consider the final passage of this legislation . 
it is about a young mother of two who took a job in the taconite mining company in northern minnesota and entered an atmosphere and environment of pervasive sexual harassment that not only applied to her , but all the women that were working in that company . 
she was the first to file a class action suit on behalf of herself and the other women in the country and the nation . 
because she was meritorious , she prevailed in that lawsuit that lead to incredible changes in regards to the treatment of women in the modern workplace . 
we allow that in the substitute , and i ask adoption of the substitute . 
whenever the republican leadership appears to be floundering or simply needs some legislative filler , they turn to the judiciary committee for some kind of anti-lawyer , anti-lawsuit bill . 
the fact is that the republican leadership has run out of meaningful legislation to consider . 
they have run out of ideas . 
the fact is , the republican leadership does not care much about these issues , and i know they are out of step with the american people on these issues . 
later today we will hear from members of the house judiciary committee who have particular subject expertise on the specifics of this legislation . 
i will leave it to these members to explain the intricacies of the federal code and the rules of civil procedure and how rule 11 fits in . 
i would like for a few minutes , however , to talk about the continued abuse of power that the republican majority takes to a new level today . 
under this rule and under this bill , republican fund-raisers are rewarded , while the majority party continues its unabashed assault on the judicial branch of this nation . 
one of the broadest arrays of groups that i have ever seen has come together to oppose this misguided , short-sighted , mean-spirited legislation . 
these groups include , but are certainly not limited to , the naacp , the legal defense fund , the american bar association , the national conference of state legislatures , the national women 's law center , and the consumers union . 
the one that stands out the most , however , is the opposition from the judicial conference of the united states . 
what is this conference that opposes what my republican friends will describe as a critically important piece of legislation ? 
their congressionally mandated mission is to be the principal policymaking body concerned with the administration of the united states courts . 
the presiding officer of this organization is none other than the chief justice of the supreme court . 
if they were less judicious in their choice of words , they would say what i say : it stinks . 
but what they say , madam speaker , this group representing the federal judges of this country , is that this legislation is fatally flawed . 
they say that rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure , what the underlying legislation aims to fix , is working better today than ever before . 
frankly , i would laugh if i did not think that the majority was so sincere in their attempts to undermine the constitutional rights of every single american . 
shame on all of you for trying to eviscerate the constitution , all for a few extra campaign dollars , because that is what this is about . 
the majority 's reckless disregard for judicial integrity mocks our constitution 's separation of powers doctrine , and i implore my colleagues to reject this rule and the underlying legislation . 
madam speaker , i reserve the balance of my time . 
madam speaker , i would like to enter into the record as well another letter signed by a number of groups urging a vote against h.r. 420 . 
i would also like to include a letter that was sent to every member of congress by michael s. greco , the president of the american bar association , opposing this legislation . 
i would also like to insert in the record the text of the letter that i mentioned in my opening speech from the judicial conference of the united states which very strongly opposes this legislation . 
dear representative : we urge you to oppose h.r. 420 , a bill that would restore the discriminatory impact of the old version of rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure , trample on states ' rights to run their own courts , and increase the extent and expense of litigation rather than reduce it . 
h.r. 420 seeks to roll back rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure to an earlier 1983 version of the rule , which would undermine carefully crafted standards that were enacted in 1993 . 
those changes expanded responsibilities of litigants , while at the same time providing greater constraints and flexibility in dealing with violations of the rule . 
it also , however , emphasizes the duty of candor by subjecting litigants to potential sanctions for insisting upon a position after it is no longer tenable , and by generally providing protection against sanctions if they withdraw or correct contentions after a potential violation is called to their attention . 
in fact , department of justice statistics show that the number of lawsuits is declining in both federal and state courts . 
the end result of h.r. 420 would be a shift of the function of rule 11 from deterring frivolous litigation to increasing litigation by those who have the resources and the time to litigate against opposing counsel . 
history shows that mandatory rule 11 sanctions imposed in 1983 , and to which h.r. 420 would have us return , were used disproportionately against plaintiffs ' ( particularly civil rights ) attorneys and those attempting to extend the law in support of unpopular causes . 
more than a decade ago , civil rights organizations -- including some of the undersigned organizations -- worked to nationwide surveys about the former rule found that motions for sanctions were most frequently sought and granted in civil rights cases . 
expressing his concerns about the former rule 11 , the honorable robert l. carter , united states district court judge for the southern district of new york , noted , `` i have no doubt that the supreme court 's opportunity to pronounce separate schools inherently unequal [ in brown v. board of education ] would have been delayed for a decade had my colleagues and i been required , upon pain of potential sanctions , to plead our legal theory explicitly from the start. '' the language of h.r. 420 purporting to protect civil rights claims provides insufficient protection for victims of discrimination moreover , h.r. 420 not only changes the rules for federal courts , it is unprecedented in that its reach extends to state court cases . 
section 3 of the bill provides , upon motion , the court is required to assess the costs of the action `` to the interstate economy. '' if the court determines that the state court action `` affects interstate commerce , '' rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure `` shall apply to such action. '' imagining the proceedings necessary to determine whether a particular state court action `` affects interstate commerce '' is mind-boggling . 
finally , the vast majority of the federal judiciary opposes the changes contained in h.r. 420 . 
the judicial conference of the united states , headed by the late chief justice rehnquist , clearly stated in a letter to chairman sensenbrenner that `` the proposed changes to rule 11 will not help deter litigation abuses , but will increase satellite litigation , costs , and delays. '' the letter also notes there is `` a remarkable consensus '' among federal district court judges in opposition to changing the rule . 
consumer federation of america . 
district of columbia million mom march . 
national association of consumer advocates . 
dear representative : i write regarding h.r. 420 , the `` lawsuit abuse reduction act. '' the american bar association strongly opposes this legislation and respectfully urges you to vote `` no '' when it is brought to the floor of the house of representatives in the near future . 
without any demonstrated problem with the enforcement or operation of rule 11 , h.r. 420 would ( 1 ) impose mandatory sanctions for any violation of rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure and remove its current `` safe harbor '' provisions ; ( 2 ) enforce a mandatory suspension from practicing law of an attorney who has violated rule 11 three times ; ( 3 ) impose federal mandatory rule 11 sanctions upon any civil state court claim that materially affects interstate commerce ; and ( 4 ) impose specific venue designation rules upon any personal injury claim filed in any state or federal court . 
as a threshold matter , the aba strongly opposes the legislation because these amendments to the federal rules of civil procedure are being proposed without utilizing the process set forth in the rules enabling act . 
this departure from the procedure of the rules enabling act is also being proposed without any demonstrated problem with the operation of the rules enabling act . 
the aba fully supports the rules enabling act process , which is based on three fundamental concepts : ( 1 ) the essential and central role of the judiciary in initiating judicial rulemaking ; ( 2 ) the use of procedures that permit full public participation , including participation by members of the legal profession ; and ( 3 ) provision for a congressional review period . 
2072-74 , congress prescribed the appropriate procedure for the formulation and adoption of rules of evidence , practice and procedure for the federal courts . 
this well-settled , congressionally specified procedure contemplates that evidentiary and procedural rules will in the first instance be considered and drafted by committees of the united states judicial conference , will thereafter be subject to thorough public comment and reconsideration , and will then be submitted to the united states supreme court for consideration and promulgation . 
finally and most importantly , the proposed rules resulting from the inclusion of all of the stakeholders , is transmitted to congress , which retains the ultimate power to veto any rule before it takes effect . 
this time-proven process proceeds from separation-of-powers concerns and is driven by the practical recognition that , among other things : ( 1 ) rules of evidence and procedure are inherently a matter of intimate concern to the judiciary , which must apply them on a daily basis ; ( 2 ) each rule forms just one part of a complicated , interlocking whole , rendering due deliberation and public comment essential to avoid unintended consequences ; and ( 3 ) the judicial conference is in a unique position to draft rules with care in a setting isolated from pressures that may interfere with painstaking consideration and due deliberation . 
we do not question congressional power to regulate the practice and procedure of federal courts . 
congress exercised this power by delegating its rulemaking authority to the judiciary through the enactment of the rules enabling act , while retaining the authority to review and amend rules prior to their taking effect . 
we do , however , question the wisdom of circumventing the rules enabling act , as h.r. 420 would do . 
the fact that the proposed changes to the rules are flawed should give pause to those who are asked to support the circumvention of the process of the rules enabling act . 
not following the processes set forth in the rules enabling act would frustrate the purpose of the act and potentially harm the effective functioning of the judicial system . 
the aba supports the current version of rule 11 because it has proven to be an effective means of discouraging dilatory motions practice and frivolous claims and defenses . 
there has been no demonstrated problem with the enforcement or operation of rule 11 . 
the aba opposes the provisions in h.r 420 to enforce a mandatory suspension of an attorney for rule 11 violations . 
the filing of frivolous claims and defenses is an important issue that deserves attention . 
attorneys practicing in these areas may be subject to more rule 11 sanctions than attorneys who handle other types of cases . 
a system that provides for mandatory suspension of attorneys with three rule 11 violations would have an extremely chilling effect on the justice system and could disproportionately impact attorneys who practice in particular areas , such as civil rights or environmental law . 
this type of mandatory suspension is even more damaging when taken in combination with efforts to require mandatory sanctions for rule 11 violations , which can not be appealed until after a judgment is rendered in a case . 
equally important , the aba strongly opposes enactment of h.r. 420 because congress should not dictate venue rules for state courts . 
to do otherwise would violate our long-established principles of federalism . 
it should remain solely within the purview of the individual states to establish local rules for procedures , either through their state legislatures or through a grant of rulemaking authority to their state judiciaries . 
the imposition of rule 11 mandatory sanctions upon the individual state courts would also violate our time-honored principles of federalism . 
earlier this year , the conference of chief justices adopted a resolution in opposition to federal usurpation of state court authority as guaranteed by the united states constitution . 
this resolution `` strongly opposed '' the enactment of any federal legislation that would `` drastically change the traditional state role in determining ethics , jurisdiction and venue rules in state litigation. '' the determination of the states to establish and operate their judicial systems in accordance with principles important to each state is entitled to respectful deference from the federal government . 
great deference should also be given to the views of these state court leaders . 
for these compelling reasons the aba strongly opposes the enactment of h.r. 420 . 
sincerely , michael s. greco , of the united states , washington , dc , may 17 , 2005 . 
chairman : i am pleased to provide you with a copy of the federal judicial center 's report of a survey of united states district judges ' experiences and views concerning rule 11 , federal rules of civil procedure . 
the report was prepared at the request of the judicial conference 's advisory committee on civil rules to provide information as part of the advisory committee 's study of proposals introduced in congress to amend rule 11 . 
the report makes it clear that the vast majority of federal district judges believe that the proposed changes to rule 11 will not help deter litigation abuses , but will increase satellite litigation , costs , and delays . 
since 1995 , legislation has regularly been introduced that would reinstate a mandatory sanctions provision of rule 11 that was adopted in 1983 and eliminated in 1993 . 
the 1993 change followed several years of examination and was made on the judicial conference 's recommendation , with the supreme court 's approval , and after congressional review . 
the 1983 provision was eliminated because during the ten years it was in place , it did not provide meaningful relief from the litigation behavior it was meant to address and generated wasteful satellite litigation that had little to do with the merits of a case . 
on january 26 , 2005 , representative lamar smith introduced the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 ( h.r. 420 ) . 
the 1983 version of rule 11 was intended to address certain improper litigation tactics by providing some punishment and deterrence . 
a `` cottage industry '' developed that churned tremendously wasteful satellite sanctions litigation that had everything to do with the 1993 amendments to rule 11 were designed to remedy major problems shown by experience with the 1983 rule , allow courts to focus on the merits of the underlying cases rather than on rule ii motions , but still provide a meaningful sanction for frivolous pleadings . 
1927 for `` vexatious '' multiplication of proceedings , or initiating an independent action for malicious prosecution or abuse of process . 
the judicial conference opposed the lawsuit abuse reduction act of2004 ( h.r. 4571 ) , the predecessor of h.r. 420 . 
the judicial conference based its position on the problems caused by the 1983 version of rule 11 , which h.r. 420 would restore . 
the judicial conference noted that these problems included : creating a significant incentive to file unmeritorious rule 11 motions by providing a possibility of monetary penalty ; engendering potential conflict of interest between clients and their lawyers , who advised withdrawal of particular claims despite the clients ' preference ; exacerbating tensions between lawyers ; and providing little incentive , and perhaps a distinct disincentive , to abandon or withdraw -- and thereby admit error on -- a pleading or claim after determining that it no longer was supportable in law or fact . 
the advisory committee on civil rules regularly monitors the operation of the civil rules , inviting the bench , bar , and public to inform it of any problems . 
although the committee is mindful of congressional concerns about frivolous filings addressed in pending legislation , the committee has not received any negative comments or complaints on existing rule ii from the bench , bar , or public . 
to gain a clearer picture of the operation of rule 11 , the committee asked the federal judicial center to survey the experience of the trial judges who must apply the rules . 
the results of the federal judicial more than 80 percent of the 278 district judges surveyed indicate that `` rule 11 is needed and it is just right as it now stands '' ; 87 percent prefer the existing rule 11 to the 1983 version or the version proposed by legislation ( e.g. , h.r. 4571 or h.r. 420 ) ; 85 percent strongly or moderately support rule 11 's safe harbor provisions ; 91 percent oppose the proposed requirement that sanctions be imposed for every rule 11 violation ; 84 percent disagree with the proposition that an award of attorney fees should be mandatory for every rule 11 violation ; 85 percent believe that the amount of groundless civil litigation has not grown since the promulgation of the 1993 rule , with 12 percent noting that such litigation has not been a problem , 19 percent noting that such litigation decreased during their tenure on the federal bench , and 54 percent noting that such litigation has remained relatively constant ; and 72 percent believe that addressing sanctions for discovery abuse in rules 26 ( g ) and 37 is better than in rule 11 . 
the judges ' experiences with the 1993 version of rule 11 point to a marked decline in rule 11 satellite litigation without any noticeable increase in the number of frivolous filings . 
h.r. 420 would effectively reinstate the 1983 version of rule 11 that proved so contentious and wasted so much time and energy of the bar and bench . 
the findings of the federal judicial center underscore the federal district judges ' united opposition to legislation amending rule 11 . 
i urge you on behalf of the judicial conference to oppose legislation amending rule 11 . 
the judicial conference appreciates your consideration of its views . 
if you prefer , you may have your staff contact karen kremer , counsel , office of legislative affairs , administrative office of the united states courts , at ( 202 ) 502-1700 . 
i understand that the genesis of this legislation is to appeal to those who like to contribute lots of money to particular campaigns , but , quite frankly , i think that is not a sound reason to pass this legislation . 
as i mentioned before , the judicial conference of the united states has outlined very clearly why this is a bad bill . 
i would hope that my colleagues would listen to some of the experts and do what is right and reject this legislation . 
madam speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
primarily , this legislation encroaches on the judicial rulemaking process by changing the federal rules of civil procedure , over which congress has no rightful jurisdiction . 
this rulemaking process is the responsibility of the judicial conference and the supreme court . 
i strongly believe that the integrity of the judiciary is in question if we impose our own set of rules on this independent body , particularly as congress continues to limit judicial discretion . 
this action is wrong , and one of the reason that judges from across the nation overwhelmingly oppose this legislation . 
plaintiffs that have just cause for action , particularly in cases dealing with civil rights , may reconsider because of the threat of mandated sanctions and the elimination of the 21-day `` safe harbor '' rule . 
mr. chairman , i will continue to approach tort reform with the objective of ensuring that any legitimate cases have their day in court . 
mr. chairman , i oppose this bill because it will not reduce frivolous lawsuits , but will instead increase the cost of litigation at the state and federal level , set back the fairness of civil rights litigation , and favor foreign corporate defendants at the expense of their domestic competitors . 
as a result of this misguided legislation , satellite litigation , costs and delays will result , and litigation abuses will not be reduced . 
the association of chief justices of the states and the federal judicial council have both criticized skipping the statutory rulemaking process . 
although the bill states that the proposed rule 11 changes shall not be construed to `` bar or impede the assertion or development of new claims or remedies under federal , state , or local civil rights law , '' the language does not clearly and simply exempt civil rights and discrimination cases , as it should . 
the honorable robert carter , united states district court judge for the southern district of new york , who was one of the pioneers in civil rights legislation and worked on the brown v. board of education case , stated , `` i have no doubt that the supreme court 's opportunity to pronounce separate schools inherently unequal in brown v. board of education would have been delayed for a decade had my colleagues and i been required , upon pain of potential sanctions , to plead our legal theory explicitly from the start. '' this is a good example of the dreadfully detrimental effect of this rule on civil rights cases . 
furthermore , this bill will operate to benefit foreign corporate defendants at the expense of their domestic counterparts . 
section 4 , the `` forum shopping '' provision , would operate to provide a litigation and financial windfall to foreign corporations at the expense of their domestic competitors . 
this is because instead of permitting claims to be filed wherever a corporation does business or has minimum contacts , as most state long-arm statutes provide , the bill permits the suit to be brought only where the defendant 's principal place of business is located . 
in the case of a foreign corporation , that does not exist in the united states . 
because it provides for reasonable attorneys ' fees in the case of a sanction , because many rule 11 sanctions are minor , and in any complex case there are almost invariably going to be some , the current law , first of all , permits the judge discretion whether to impose sanctions or not . 
second of all , the current law says that if it is pointed out to an attorney that he has done something that would fall under rule 11 , he has 21 days to correct it . 
thirdly , because under those circumstances this bill provides for attorneys ' fees , they had better have their head examined if they want to sue a large corporation , because if they are the little guy , and they have one attorney , and he is paid a reasonable fee , and they can afford the litigation , they hope ; but if they are suing the big company , and general motors has 32 attorneys lined up over there , and they are all charging $ 800 an hour , then reasonable attorneys ' fees are going to be a lot of money , and they have to anticipate , if they file that suit , that because of the mandatory nature of the rule 11 sanctions that this bill would impose , because of the lack of an ability to correct it , because of the automatic sanctions and mandatory sanctions , they have to assume that they are going to have to pay those sanctions , and they are going to have to pay the mandatory attorneys ' fees , so they had better not sue the big boys . 
what this bill is really saying is big corporations shall be exempt from lawsuits by people who can not afford to pay huge attorneys ' fees of the big corporations , because we have to assume that will happen , and because this bill leaves no discretion to the judge . 
it is no surprise that the united states judicial conference , the national association for the advancement of colored people , the alliance for justice , public citizen , people for the american way , the american association of people with disabilities , the lawyers committee for civil rights in law , the american bar association , the national conference of state legislatures , national partnership for women , national women 's law center , the center for justice and democracy , consumers union , the national association of consumer advocates , and the naacp legal defense fund all oppose the bill . 
in other words , if members care about civil rights , if they care about the ability of the consumer to have justice with a large corporation , if they care about civil liberties , if they care about people being able to use the federal or state courts , they must vote against this bill . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i observe the gentleman tells us that president bush assures us of the problem of frivolous lawsuits . 
president bush assured us there were weapons of mass destruction in iraq and a lot of other nonsense . 
there are also novel legal claims which some may consider frivolous , but which , in the fullness of time , yield legal progress . 
that is not justice , to enforce technicalities against the discretion of the judge . 
the association of state chief justices are not in favor of this . 
the judicial council of the united states is not in favor of this . 
to say that attorneys ' fees , reasonable attorneys ' fees , will be assessed mandatorily , whatever the judge thinks , whether he thinks or she thinks it is reasonable or not , is to say that you better not sue the big boys , that you better not sue general motors , and a small business , a supplier can not sue wal-mart lest the attorney violate some technicality and the attorneys ' fees of wal-mart , with their 45 attorneys sitting there , be assessed against the small supplier . 
what this bill is , mr. chairman , is another attempt , another in a series of attempts , the class action bills , the various other bills we have had here , to close the courts , to close the courts to anyone who would try to hold giant corporations accountable . 
we are going to punish you if you do , and we are going to make sure you can not find an attorney who will take the case because they are worried about draconian imposition of draconian attorneys ' fees . 
i think the gentlewoman has established not only that the system is not broken , but that any claim of an avalanche of frivolous litigation is absurd for these kinds of statistics of declining use of the courts , of declining caseloads , of declining filings . 
this is an attempt again to shut the courthouse doors to people who need access to the courts , and on the most fundamental grounds of justice , this bill ought to be soundly rejected . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i am pleased that chairman sensenbrenner has included in the manager 's amendment two provisions that i offered in the judiciary committee markup of the bill , and i thank the chairman for his support . 
secondly , the second amendment bans the concealment of unlawful conduct when the interests of public health and safety outweigh the interest of litigating parties in concealment . 
the settlement will include a payment of a sum to the defendant , but will also often include an agreement that the records will be sealed and no one will ever talk about it . 
but meanwhile , hundreds of thousands of people may continue to be injured by that product in the future . 
the amendment says that an agreement to keep a settlement secret , the terms and conditions of settlement secret , can not be approved by the court unless the court determines that the interests of the parties in secrecy , perhaps legitimate interests outweigh the interests of the public in knowledge of whatever it is . 
but these changes are not enough for me to support final passage of what is still an egregious bill . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
once again , the republicans must prove that they are the handmaidens of the special interests by putting this bill on the floor today . 
just when we should be talking about creating good jobs for the american people , expanding access to quality health care , broadening opportunity in education , having a strong national defense and doing it all in a fiscally sound way , the republicans are wasting the time of this congress and testing the patience of the american people with legislation that is frivolous . 
it is something that is , again , another reflection of the culture of cronyism that exists under the republican leadership in washington , dc . 
the outrageous venue provisions in the republican bill give defendant corporations special advantages by overriding state minimum-contact provisions and limiting the locations in which a suit can be brought and could render foreign corporations out of reach of the american justice system . 
today , we will take the opportunity to address the republican culture of cronyism . 
mr. chairman , i really want to congratulate the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. kind ) xz4002180 and the gentleman from california ( mr. schiff ) xz4003610 for putting together a really excellent substitute to get rid of loopholes in the republican bill that favors big corporate interests and foreign corporations and to protect civil rights claims . 
the substitute seeks to stop the madness that exists on the floor of this house when it is used as a venue to promote the special interests in our country . 
let us take a stand to end this culture of cronyism and corruption . 
we must vote for this substitute and send this bill back to ensure that no one who defrauds the american people during natural disasters is ever permitted to take undue advantage of our legal system . 
it has very excellent provisions and is worthy of the support of our colleagues . 
i rise today to offer an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r. 420 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 , with the gentleman from wisconsin ( mr. kind ) xz4002180 . 
mr. chairman , the base bill certainly has an important and worthy stated goal of cracking down on the filing of frivolous lawsuits . 
as a former federal prosecutor and a member of the bar , i strongly support this meritorious goal , as any responsible attorney should . 
however , i am forced to oppose the legislation in its current form as it contains a number of serious deficiencies which i believe the substitute amendment will remedy . 
second , the legislation would inappropriately involve the states in the application of the federal rules of civil procedure . 
and , third , the legislation 's forum-shopping provisions drastically change state venue laws to benefit foreign corporations over domestic corporations and victims , to say nothing of doing a great deal to damage states ' rights . 
members on both sides of the aisle agree that our laws and rules of procedure must prohibit frivolous litigation . 
the mandatory sanctions begin after the very first violation ; but after the third , the attorney shall be found in contempt of court and referred to the appropriate state bar associations for disciplinary proceedings , including suspension . 
our substitute amendment also has strong three-strikes-and-you-are-out provisions for attorneys who engage in frivolous conduct during discovery , including causing unnecessary delay or needless increases in the costs of litigation . 
our substitute also limits the ability of wrongdoers to conceal any conduct harmful to the public welfare by requiring that such court records not be sealed unless the court finds that a sealing is justified . 
we also include strong language to provide a presumption of a rule 11 violation for repeatedly relitigating the same issue . 
i am pleased that some of these important provisions have recently been added to the base bill . 
the venue provisions , however , in section 4 of the base bill would recast state and federal court jurisdiction and venue in personal injury cases . 
this section would actually operate to provide a litigation and financial windfall to foreign corporations at the expense of their domestic competitors . 
instead of permitting claims to be filed wherever a corporation does business or has minimum contacts , as most state long-arm jurisdiction statutes provide , section 4 only permits the suit to be brought where the defendant 's principal place of business is located . 
in fact , this section could operate to make it impossible to sue a foreign corporation in this country , only further promoting the disturbing process of corporations in our country relocating their headquarters overseas to avoid u.s. taxes . 
this is due to the fact that much , if not most , of the impetus for the 1993 changes stemmed from abuses by defendants in civil rights cases , namely , the civil rights defendants were choosing to harass civil rights plaintiffs by filing a series of rule 11 motions intended to slow down and impede meritorious civil rights cases . 
a 1991 federal judicial study found that the incidence of rule 11 sanctions or sua sponte orders is higher in civil rights cases than in some other types of cases . 
another study found that there is ample evidence to suggest that plaintiffs in civil rights cases , plaintiffs in particular , were far more likely than defendants to be the target of rule 11 motions and the recipient of sanctions . 
while the base bill purports to encourage that the provisions not be applied to civil rights cases , the fact of the matter is it does not explicitly exempt civil rights cases as our substitute does . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , before i recognize my colleague from texas , i want to respond to a couple of points made by my other colleague from texas ; that is , comparing the strength of the three strikes and you 're out provisions in the substitute and base bill . 
that is a narrower provision of the base bill . 
with the first violation there is the required payment of costs and attorneys ' fees . 
and then the third provision of referral to the state bar for possible disbarment , compared to the base bill which calls for a 1-year suspension only in the specific court where the three violations occurred . 
in fact , when you ask the judges who have operated under both systems , the one that is proposed by the base bill and the one that is proposed by the substitute , the courts were quite clear that the earlier form of rule 11 , which we would go back to in the base bill , spawned a cottage industry where someone would file a rule 11 motion , the opposing counsel would file a rule 11 motion on the rule 11 motion , and then you would have litigation over whose rule 11 motion should succeed . 
in fact , in 1993 , the judicial conference remarked that the experience with the amended rule since 1993 , since we got away from what the base bill would take us back to , has demonstrated a marked decline to rule 11 satellite litigation without any noticeable increase in the number of frivolous filings . 
mr. chairman , i have no further speakers , and i reserve the balance of my time . 
does my colleague have the opportunity to close or does the offerer of the amendment ? 
in my concluding comments i want to reiterate some of the points that have been made with respect to the civil rights provisions and quote from the testimony of professor theodore eisenberg , who testified before the house committee on the judiciary in the 108th congress and said : `` a congress considering reinstating the fee-shifting aspect of rule 11 in the name of tort reform should understand what it will be doing . 
it will be discouraging the civil rights cases disproportionately affected by the old rule 11 in the name of addressing purported abuse in an area of law , personal injury tort , found to have less abuse than other areas. '' i would also like to cite the testimony of the honorable robert l. carter , u.s. district judge for the southern district of new york when he stated : `` i have no doubt that the supreme court 's opportunity to pronounce separate schools inherently unequal in brown v. board of education would have been delayed for a decade had my colleagues and i been required , upon pain of potential sanctions , to plead our legal theory explicitly from the start. '' we do not want to put off a brown v. board of education civil rights case like that for a decade because of a rule 11 that has been rejected by the federal courts already . 
the language in the substitute makes it clear that neither the sanctions approach we have taken in the substitute nor the sanctions approach taken in the base bill would apply in civil rights cases ; and while there is some language of suggestion in the base bill , it is not definitive . 
in fact , the naacp wrote in respect to the language in the base bill : `` while language nominally intended to mitigate the damage that this bill will cause to civil rights cases has been added , it is vague and simply insufficient in addressing our concerns. '' so on the basis of a need not to chill civil rights legislation , which i think we have only seen the greater importance with , as katrina ripped off the veneer of poverty and inequality in the country once again for all to see , as we consider that the base bill would implement a change that the courts themselves have rejected and found spawned a cottage industry in meritless rule 11 litigation , and as the base bill has a stronger and i think more sensible three-strikes-and-you-are-out provision , i would urge my colleagues to support the democratic substitute in preference to the flawed base bill . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i rise in support of h.r. 420 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act . 
the legislation also prevents forum shopping by requiring suits to be filed where a plaintiff resides , where an injury occurred , or where the defendant 's principal place of business is located . 
mr. chairman , i support h.r. 420 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 . 
frivolous lawsuits are brought , for example , when there is no evidence that shows negligence on the part of the defendant . 
these nuisance lawsuits make a mockery of our legal system . 
of course , many americans have legitimate legal grievances , from someone wrongly disfigured during an operation to a company responsible for contaminating a community 's water supply . 
no one who deserves justice should be denied justice ; however , gaming of the system by a few lawyers drives up the cost of doing business and drives down the integrity of the judicial system . 
the chief executive officer of san antonio 's methodist children 's hospital was sued after he stepped into a plaintiff 's hospital room and asked how the patient was doing . 
of course , a jury cleared him of any wrongdoing . 
after 8 years of costly litigation , the pennsylvania supreme court threw out the case , writing that there is `` a commonsense notion that it is necessary to properly chew hard foodstuffs prior to swallowing. '' but , of course , the defendants had to absorb hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal fees . 
in a new jersey little league game , a player lost sight of a fly ball hit because of the sun . 
it passed the house last year by a margin of almost 60 votes . 
if a judge determines that a claim is frivolous , they can order the plaintiff to pay the attorneys ' fees of the defendant who was victim of their frivolous claim . 
it is a problem that even the american trial lawyers association has tried to address in its own code of conduct by declaring , `` no american trial lawyers association member shall file or maintain a frivolous suit , issue , or position. '' however , atla has not disciplined a single attorney for violation of this code of conduct in the last 2 years . 
it requires that personal injury claims be filed only where the plaintiff resides , where the injury occurred , or the defendant 's principal place of business is located . 
this provision addresses the growing problem of attorneys who shop around the country for judges who routinely award excessive amounts . 
one of the nation 's wealthiest trial lawyers , dickie scruggs , has told us exactly how this abuse occurs . 
they 've got large populations of voters who are in on the deal . 
and so it 's a political force in their jurisdiction , and it 's almost impossible to get a fair trial if you 're a defendant in some of these places . 
the plaintiff lawyer walks in there and writes the number on the blackboard , and the first juror meets the last one coming out the door with that amount of money ... .. 
any lawyer fresh out of law school can walk in there and win the case , so it does n't matter what the evidence or law is. '' forum shopping is a part of lawsuit abuse , and we must pass legislation to stop it from occurring . 
mr. chairman , the following organizations support h.r. 420 : american tort reform association , national association of home builders , national association of manufacturers , national restaurant association , american insurance association , and the united states chamber of commerce . 
and this legislation is the top legislative priority of the national federation of independent businesses . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from florida ( mr. keller ) xz4002120 , a member of the judiciary committee . 
mr. chairman , i yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from ohio ( mr. chabot ) xz4000710 , the chairman of the constitutional law subcommittee of the judiciary committee . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , the scourge of frivolous litigation mars the fabric of our legal system and undermines the vitality of our economy . 
frivolous lawsuits have become a form of legalized extortion . 
without the serious threat of certain punishment for filing frivolous claims , innocent people and small businesses will continue to confront the stark economic reality that simply paying off frivolous claims through monetary settlements is always cheaper than litigating the case until no fault is found . 
frivolous lawsuits subvert the proper role of the tort system and affront fundamental notions of fairness that are central to our system of justice . 
the effects of frivolous litigation are both clear and widespread . 
youth sports are shutting down in the face of lawsuits for injuries and even hurt feelings . 
the girl scouts in the metro detroit area alone have to sell 36 , 000 boxes of cookies each year just to pay for their liability insurance . 
the supervisor of district operations wrote , `` if a person falls , you are more liable than if you had never plowed at all. '' unfortunately , the times we are in allow for a much more litigious environment than common sense would dictate . 
today results of frivolous lawsuits are written on all manner of product warnings that aim to prevent obvious misuse . 
the nation 's oldest ladder manufacturer , family-owned john s. tilley ladders company near albany , new york , recently filed for bankruptcy protection and sold off most of its assets due to litigation costs . 
founded in 1855 , the tilley firm could not handle the cost of liability insurance , which had risen from 6 percent of sales a decade ago to 29 percent , while never losing an actual court judgment . 
the workers of john s. tilley ladders never faced a competitor they could not beat in the marketplace , but they were no match for frivolous lawsuits . 
then the civil rules advisory committee , an obscure branch of the courts , made penalties optional . 
rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure presently does not require sanctions against parties who bring frivolous lawsuits . 
without certain punishment for those who bring these suits and the threat of serious monetary penalties to compensate the victims of frivolous lawsuits , there is little incentive for lawsuit victims to spend time and money seeking sanctions for lawsuit abuse . 
it would also extend these same protections to cover state cases that a state judge determines have interstate implications and close the loopholes of a tort system that often resembles a tort lottery . 
the legislation applies to frivolous lawsuits brought by businesses as well as individuals , and it expressly precludes application of the bill to civil rights cases if applying the bill to such cases would bar or impede the assertion or development of new claims or remedies under federal , state , or local civil rights law . 
the class action fairness act , which was recently signed into law after receiving broad support in both houses , prohibits the unfair practice of forum shopping for favorable courts when the case is styled as a class action . 
one of the nation 's wealthiest personal injury attorneys , richard `` dickie '' scruggs , and i quoted him at length a while ago , but i will quote him a little bit shorter right now , described what he calls `` magic jurisdictions '' as `` what i call the `magic jurisdictions ' is where it is almost impossible to get a fair trial if you are a defendant . 
any lawyer fresh out of law school can walk in there and win the case , so it does not matter what the evidence or the law is. '' america 's system of justice deserves better , much better . 
h.r. 420 prevents the unfair practice of forum shopping by requiring that personal injury cases be brought only where there is some reasonable connection to the case ; namely , where the plaintiff lives or was allegedly injured , where the defendant 's principal place of business is located , or where the defendant resides . 
i urge my colleagues to return a measure of fairness to america 's legal system by passing the lawsuit abuse reduction act . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , the bipartisan manager 's amendment i am offering today reflects the important contributions of the gentleman from new york ( mr. nadler ) xz4002890 and the gentleman from virginia ( mr. scott ) xz4003632 . 
it incorporates into the base bill provisions imposing sanctions for the destruction of relevant documents in a pending federal court proceeding , an amendment setting standards for a court 's determination that certain court records should be sealed , and an amendment providing for a presumption on a rule 11 violation when the same issue is repeatedly relitigated . 
this manager 's amendment also makes clear that in the antiforum-shopping provisions , if there is no state court in the county in which the injury occurred , the case can be brought in the nearest adjacent county where a court of general jurisdiction is located . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
i will begin with the title of the first section of the substitute . 
it is entitled , `` three strikes and you 're out. '' but the title of section 1 does not reflect the text it contains . 
in fact , the substitute provides that following three violations of its provisions : `` the court shall refer each such attorney to one or more appropriate state bar associations for disciplinary proceedings. '' the substitute does not say the attorney shall be suspended from the practice of law . 
specifically , the base bill states that after three strikes : `` the federal district court shall suspend that attorney from the practice of law in that federal district court. '' the base bill contains a substantive three-strikes-and-you-are-out provision that will prevent attorneys who file frivolous lawsuits from getting into the courtroom . 
not only are filers of frivolous lawsuits not out after three strikes under the substitute , but the substitute even changes what constitutes a strike under existing law . 
currently , rule 11 allows sanctions against frivolous filers whose denials of factual contentions are not warranted on the evidence or are not reasonably based on a lack of information or belief . 
the substitute removes this protection for victims of frivolous pleadings under existing law . 
in addition , the substitute for the first time without penalty allows defendants to file papers with the court that include factual denials of the allegations against them that are not warranted by the evidence and not reasonably based . 
this is a step backward for victims of frivolous lawsuits under both state and federal law . 
so the substitute not only undermines the clarity of the three strikes and you 're out rule , it purports to establish , it dramatically expands the potential for even more frivolous lawsuits . 
furthermore , the base bill provides that those who file frivolous lawsuits can be made to pay all costs and attorneys ' fees that are `` incurred as a direct result of the filing of the pleading , motion , or other paper that is the subject of the violation. '' the substitute does not include that critical language which is necessary to make clear that those filing frivolous lawsuits must be made to pay the full costs imposed on their victim by the frivolous lawsuit . 
the proponent of this amendment claims that the anti-forum shopping standards in h.r. 420 regarding where a personal injury lawsuit can be brought are somehow unfair , even though they are the very same standards contained in the vast majority of state venue laws . 
in fact , the gentleman from california 's own state venue law provides as follows : `` if the action is for injury to person or personal property or for death from wrongful act or negligence , the superior court in either the county where the injury occurs or the injury causing death occurs or the county where the defendants , or some of them reside at the commencement of the action , is the proper court for the trial of the action. '' insofar as foreign corporations can not be sued in some limited circumstances in this country , that is not the fault of h.r. 420 , nor is it the fault of california 's venue law . 
it is a result of the supreme court 's interpretation of the due process clause . 
mr. chairman , i reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , i want to point out to the gentleman from wisconsin who just spoke that i could have saved him a lot of time . 
and i would like to remind him that he might want to take a look at the language of h.r. 420 , that it applies just as much to businesses as it does individuals , despite statements to the contrary . 
mr. chairman , i yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from utah ( mr. cannon ) xz4000590 , the chairman of the administrative law subcommittee of the judiciary committee . 
mr. chairman , i believe i have the right to close , and i am the remaining speaker on this side , so i will reserve the balance of my time . 
mr. chairman , the gentlewoman from california who spoke previously to the gentleman from california who just finished used a couple of words that i would like to return to and clarify . 
she used the word `` madness , '' but anyone listening to this debate or anyone having a firsthand knowledge of frivolous lawsuits knows that the real madness is the filing of thousands of frivolous lawsuits across this country that unfairly tarnish the reputations of innocent citizens , that unfairly destroy the businesses of small business owners across the country . 
that is the type of madness that this bill addresses . 
she also used the phrase `` special interests , '' but again , i think anyone listening to this debate today and anyone knowing firsthand the agony and the losses and the destruction caused by frivolous lawsuits realizes that the special interests that this bill hopes to protect are really the special interests of the american people who have stuttered and staggered and been burdened by frivolous lawsuits too many times and much too often in our history . 
the special interests , if there are any , involved in this legislation again are obvious to those who listened to the debate , the trial lawyers of america ; and , mr. chairman , let me take a minute here just to dwell on that subject because i happen to believe the vast majority of trial lawyers or personal injury lawyers are honorable people and they are members of an honorable profession . 
i think one of the aspects of the debate that most troubles me is , in fact , the lack of sanctioning lawyers who engage in frivolous lawsuits by the trial lawyers of america . 
their own code of conduct reads as follows : `` no atla member shall file or maintain a frivolous suit , issue or position. '' we checked and not a single member of the trial lawyers association , not a single lawyer , had been sanctioned in the last 2 years ; and , in fact , no one can even tell us when the last time any attorney was sanctioned for filing a frivolous lawsuit . 
i think the trial lawyers would have a lot more credibility on this subject if , in fact , they had monitored their own ranks and , in fact , had sanctioned just a single trial lawyer for filing one of those tens of thousands of frivolous lawsuits that have been filed . 
that , as i say , is discouraging ; and i hope the trial lawyers of america will see fit in the future to sanction some attorney somewhere , somehow who has filed a frivolous lawsuit . 
let me give some examples of actual suits that are frivolous , but that would be allowed under the democratic substitute amendment . 
a florida high school senior filed suit after her picture was left out of the school 's yearbook . 
the families of two north haven , connecticut , sophomores filed suit because of the school 's decision to drop the students from the drum majorette squad . 
a michigan man filed suit claiming that television ads that showed bud light as the source of fantasies involving tropical settings and beautiful women misled him and caused him physical and mental injury , emotional distress , and financial loss . 
in every one of these instances and in thousands of others , the individuals sued were forced to spend considerable amounts of money , time and effort to defend themselves . 
this is a travesty of justice , and it is simply wrong . 
h.r. 420 will end the filing of frivolous lawsuits . 
it would still subject small business owners to the cost of frivolous lawsuits and subject individuals to the cost of rising insurance premiums and health care costs that result from frivolous lawsuits . 
the substitute includes nothing to address the problem of forum shopping which is also a large part of the problem . 
mr. chairman , i yield back the balance of my time . 
first , nothing in h.r. 420 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act , prohibits anyone from being sued for fraud to the full extent of federal law . 
second , the motion to recommit relates to contract claims when the section of the bill that it modifies relates only to personal injury claims . 
mr. speaker , i just received a statement of administration policy from the executive office of the president which i would like to read , because it provides a good summary of h.r. 420 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 . 
this statement reads as follows : `` the administration supports house passage of h.r. 420 in order to address the growing problem of frivolous litigation . 
h.r. 420 would rein in the negative impact of frivolous lawsuits on the nation 's economy by establishing a strong disincentive to file such suits in federal and state courts . 
these costs hurt the economy , clog our courts , and are burdening the american businesses of america . 
the administration believes the bill is a step in the right direction toward the goal of ending lawsuit abuse. '' mr. speaker , i urge my colleagues to oppose this absolutely irrelevant motion to recommit and support the underlying bill . 
mr. speaker , i yield back the balance of my time . 
prior to 1993 , defendants in civil rights cases would file a crushing number of motions alleging frivolous actions on the part of the plaintiff in a blatant attempt to delay the case . 
however , since the republican party does n't think judges have any business deciding how to run their courts , they want to repeal this change and revert back to the days of delayed justice . 
this is one of many reasons why the u.s. judicial conference , headed by chief justice john roberts , opposes this bill . 
if that makes me a friend of the trial lawyers , then i proudly stand with the brilliant litigators thurgood marshall and abraham lincoln in opposition to political hacks like karl rove and george w. bush . 
mr. chairman , i rise in opposition of h.r. 420 , the lawsuit abuse reduction act of 2005 . 
this bill also protects foreign corporations at the expense of consumers in that it unfairly dictates to states where their citizens can enforce legal right against a corporation based outside of the united states . 
while h.r. 420 allows a victim to file a claim in a court in his or her home state , because of existing jurisdictional rules that state may be unable to exercise power over the foreign corporation . 
so , i could support many of the provisions of this bill . 
part of the bill would change rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure in ways that would basically restore that rule as it was in 1992 . 
as a result , lawyers filing frivolous lawsuits in federal courts would face mandatory sanctions in the form of payments to those who were victimized by those lawsuits . 
i also can support strong provisions to deter -- and , if necessary punish -- repeated violations of the rules against misuse of the courts through frivolous lawsuits . 
however , i am not enthusiastic about the idea of congress 's attempting to micro-manage the state courts or to take over the job of regulating the practice of law in state courts in the way that this bill would do . 
and i am definitely opposed to changing the rules in ways that could make it impossible for people with valid claims to receive proper consideration of their cases . 
for that reason , i must object to the provisions of the bill which , as the non-partisan congressional research service explains , `` would preclude litigation in united states courts that would be authorized under current law . 
a federal suit might be brought against it in one of the judicial districts where . 
but i find it even more unacceptable that prime beneficiaries of these provisions could be american companies who have chosen to fly a foreign flag in order to escape paying their federal taxes . 
many of us who oppose the underlying bill do so because it will actually increase the volume of frivolous litigation . 
for example , some sort of rule 11 procedure exists in virtually every state in the country . 
to impose a new federal law in every state court action will make state courts conduct a minilawsuit on federal validity before conducting a minilawsuit on state law validity , before they ever get to the merits of the case . 
and if there is any area where we want to make it easier to get to the merits of the underlying claim , not harder , it is an area of lawsuits against federal contractors who are engaged in defrauding the public . 
whether it is disaster relief or the war on terror , we have never done so much of the public 's business on a no-bid basis . 
there has never been more opportunity for waste , fraud , and abuse in the conduct of the public 's business than right now . 
it says that federal contractors , engaged in price gouging in disaster relief work can still be sued anyplace where they can be sued now , in any state where both the laws of the state and the u.s. constitution says it is okay to sue them . 
this house has voted time and again to protect companies that are gouging consumers in the wake of natural disasters and national tragedies . 
